Abraham Lincoln	{"City":["Chicago","Lexington","New Orleans","New Salem","Richmond","Springfield"],"Organization":["Congress","Illinois House","Lincoln's party","Republican Party","Senate","United  Party","United States House","Whig Party"],"Country":["United States"],"Company":["Gallup Inc.","Lincoln Home National Historic Site"],"Person":["Abraham Lincoln","Ann Rutledge","Denton Offutt","Edward Baker Lincoln (Eddie)","James Lindgren","Lincoln By Charles","Lucy Hanks","Mary Owens","Mary Todd","Mary Todd Lincoln","Nancy Hanks","Nancy Lincoln","Robert E. Lee","Robert Todd Lincoln","Sarah Bush Johnston","Sarah Bush Lincoln","Sarah Bush Lincoln|Sarah","Sarah Lincoln Grigsby|Sarah","Stephen A. Douglas","Thomas \"Tad\" Lincoln","Thomas Lincoln","Ulysses S. Grant","William Wallace  Lincoln"],"State":["Coles County","Hardin County","Illinois","Illinois|Coles County","Illinois|Macon County","Indiana","Indiana|Perry County","Jefferson County","Kentucky","Kentucky|LaRue County","LaRue County","Macon County","Menard County","Mineral County","Mississippi","Perry County","Sangamon County","Virginia","West  County","West Virginia"]}	Abraham Lincoln (February 12, 1809 – April 15, 1865) was the List of Presidents of the United States|16th President of the United States, serving from March 1861 until Assassination of Abraham Lincoln|his assassination in April 1865. He successfully led his country through its greatest  military and moral crisis – the American Civil War – preserving the Union while ending slavery, and promoting economic and financial modernization. Reared in a poor family on the western frontier, Lincoln was mostly self-educated. He became a country lawyer, a Whig Party (United States)|Whig Party leader, Illinois House of  state legislator in the 1830s, and a one-term member of the United States House of  in the 1840s. After a series of debates in 1858 that gave national visibility to his opposition to the expansion of slavery, Lincoln lost a Senate race to his arch-rival Stephen A. Douglas. Lincoln, a moderate from a swing state, secured the History of the Republican Party (United  Party nomination. With almost no support in the South he swept the North and was United States presidential election, 1860|elected president in 1860. His election was the signal for seven Southern United  slave states to declare their Secession in the United  from the Union and form the Confederate States of America. The departure of the Southerners gave Lincoln's party firm control of Congress, but no formula for compromise or reconciliation was found. And the war came. When the North  rallied behind the national flag after the Confederate attack on Fort Sumter on April 12, 1861, President Lincoln concentrated on the military and political dimensions of the war effort. His goal was now to reunify the nation. He vigorously exercised unprecedented war powers, including the arrest and detention without trial of thousands of suspected secessionists. He prevented British recognition of the Confederacy by skillfully handling the Trent Affair|"Trent" affair late in 1861. His efforts toward the  of slavery include issuing his Emancipation Proclamation in 1863, encouraging the border states to outlaw slavery, and helping push through Congress the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which finally ended all slavery in December 1865. Lincoln closely supervised the war effort, especially the selection of top generals, including commanding general Ulysses S. Grant. He brought leaders of various factions of his party into his cabinet and pressured them to cooperate. Under his leadership, the Union (American Civil War)|Union set up a naval blockade that shut down the South's normal trade, took control of the Border states (American Civil War)|border slave states at the start of the war, gained control of communications with gunboats on the southern river systems, and tried repeatedly to capture the Confederate capital at Richmond, Virginia. Each time a general failed, Lincoln substituted another until finally Grant succeeded in 1865. An exceptionally astute politician deeply involved with power issues in each state, he reached out to War Democrats and managed his own re-election in the United States presidential election, 1864|1864 presidential election. As the leader of the moderate faction of the Republican party, Lincoln found his policies and personality were "blasted from all sides": Radical Republicans demanded harsher treatment of the South, War Democrats desired more compromise, Copperheads  despised him, and irreconcilable secessionists plotted his death. Tagg, p. xiii. Politically, Lincoln fought back with patronage, by pitting his opponents against each other, and by appealing to the American people with his powers of oratory. Randall (1947), pp. 65–87. His Gettysburg Address of 1863 became the most quoted speech in American history.  Bulla (2010), p. 222. It was an iconic statement of America's dedication to the principles of nationalism, Republicanism in the United  equal rights, liberty, and democracy. At the close of the war, Lincoln held a moderate view of Reconstruction Era of the United  seeking to reunite the nation speedily through a policy of generous reconciliation in the face of lingering and bitter divisiveness. But six days after the surrender of Confederate commanding general Robert E. Lee, Lincoln was Assassination of Abraham  by Confederate sympathizer John Wilkes Booth. His death was the first assassination of a U.S. president and sent the nation into Funeral and burial of Abraham  Lincoln has been consistently Historical rankings of Presidents of the United States#Scholar survey results|ranked by scholars and the public as one of the three greatest U.S. presidents. name="Ranking Our   "Ranking Our Presidents"]. James Lindgren. November 16, 2000. International World History Project.   "Americans Say Reagan Is the Greatest President"]. Gallup Inc. February 28, 2011. ==Family and childhood== ===Early life=== Abraham Lincoln was born February 12, 1809, the second child of Thomas Lincoln and Nancy Lincoln (née Hanks), in a one-room log cabin on the Sinking Spring Farm in Hardin County,  County, Kentucky, Donald (1996), pp. 20–22. (now LaRue County, Kentucky|LaRue County). Lincoln's paternal grandfather and namesake, Abraham Lincoln  had moved his family from Virginia to Jefferson County,  County, Kentucky,  Pessen, pp. 24–25.  where he was ambushed and killed in an Indian raid in 1786, with his children, including Lincoln's father Thomas, looking on.  White, pp. 12–13. Thomas was left to make his own way on the frontier. Donald (1996), p. 21. Lincoln's mother, Nancy, was the daughter of Lucy Hanks, and was born in what is now Mineral County, West  County, West Virginia, then part of Virginia. Lucy moved with Nancy to Kentucky. Nancy Hanks married Thomas, who became a respected citizen. He bought and sold several farms, including Knob Creek Farm. The family attended a Separate Baptists church, which had high moral standards and opposed alcohol, dancing, and slavery. Donald (1996), pp. 22–24. Thomas enjoyed considerable status in  he sat on juries, appraised estates, served on country slave patrols, and guarded prisoners. By the time his son Abraham was born, Thomas owned two farms, several town lots, livestock, and horses. He was among the richest men in the county.  Lamb, p. 189. However, in 1816, Thomas lost all of his land in court cases because of faulty title  titles.  File:Young Lincoln By Charles  young Lincoln in sculpture at Senn Park, Chicago|alt=A statue of young Lincoln sitting on a stump, holding a book open on his lap The family moved north across the Ohio River to free (i.e., non-slave) territory and made a new start in Perry County, Indiana|Perry County, Indiana. Lincoln later noted that this move was "partly on account of slavery" but mainly due to land title difficulties.  Sandburg (1926), p. 20. In Indiana, when Lincoln was nine, his mother Nancy died of milk sickness in 1818.  After the death of Lincoln's mother, his older sister, Sarah Lincoln Grigsby|Sarah, took charge of caring for him until their father remarried in 1819; Sarah later died in her 20s while giving birth to a stillborn son. Donald (1996), p. 20. Thomas Lincoln's new wife was the widow Sarah Bush Lincoln|Sarah Bush Johnston, the mother of three of her own children. Lincoln became very close to his stepmother, and referred to her as "Mother". Donald (1996), pp. 26–27. As a pre-teen, he did not like the hard labor associated with frontier life. Some in his family, and in the neighborhood, for a time considered him to be lazy. White, pp. 25, 31, 47. Donald (1996), p. 33. As he grew into his teens, he willingly took responsibility for all chores expected of him as one of the boys in the household and became an adept axeman in his work building rail fences. He attained a reputation for brawn and audacity after a very competitive wrestling match to which he was challenged by the renowned leader of a group of ruffians, "the Clary's Grove boys". Donald (1996), p. 41. Lincoln also agreed with the customary obligation of a son to give his father all earnings from work done outside the home until age 21.  Donald (1996), pp. 30–33. In later years, Lincoln occasionally loaned his father money. Donald (1996), pp. 28, 152. Lincoln became increasingly distant from his father, in part because of his father's lack of education. While young Lincoln's formal elementary education consisted approximately of a year's worth of classes from several itinerant teachers, he was mostly self-educated and was an avid reader. Donald (1996), pp. 38–43; Prokopowicz, pp. 18–19. In 1830, fearing a milk sickness outbreak along the Ohio River, the Lincoln family moved west, where they settled on public land in Macon County, Illinois|Macon County, Illinois, another free, non-slave state. Donald (1996), p. 36. In 1831, Thomas relocated the family to a Lincoln Log Cabin State Historic Site|new homestead in Coles County, Illinois|Coles County, Illinois. It was then that, as an ambitious 22-year-old, Lincoln decided to seek a better life and struck out on his own. Canoeing down the Sangamon River, Lincoln ended up in the village of New Salem, Menard County, Illinois|New Salem in Sangamon County,  County. Thomas (2008), pp. 23–53; Carwardine (2003), pp. 3–5. In the spring of 1831, hired by New Salem businessman Denton Offutt and accompanied by friends, he took goods by flatboat from New Salem to New Orleans via the Sangamon, Illinois, and Mississippi rivers. After arriving in New Orleans—and witnessing slavery firsthand—he walked back home. Sandburg (1926), pp. 22–23. ===Marriage and children=== Lincoln's first romantic interest was Ann Rutledge, whom he met when he first moved to New Salem; by 1835, they were in a relationship but not formally engaged. She died on August 25, most likely of typhoid fever. Donald (1996), pp. 55–58. In the early 1830s, he met Mary Owens from Kentucky when she was visiting her sister. Late in 1836, Lincoln agreed to a match with Mary if she returned to New Salem. Mary did return in November 1836, and Lincoln courted her for a time; however, they both had second thoughts about their relationship. On August 16, 1837, Lincoln wrote Mary a letter suggesting he would not blame her if she ended the relationship. She never replied and the courtship was over. Donald (1996), pp. 67–69; Thomas (2008), pp. 56–57, 69–70. In 1840, Lincoln became engaged to Mary Todd Lincoln|Mary Todd, who was from a wealthy slave-holding family in Lexington,  Kentucky. Lamb, p. 43. They met in Springfield,  Illinois, in December 1839  Sandburg (1926), pp. 46–48. and were engaged the following December. Donald (1996), p. 86. A wedding set for January 1, 1841, was canceled when the two broke off their engagement at Lincoln's initiative.  Donald (1996), p. 87. They later met again at a party and married on November 4, 1842, in the Springfield mansion of Mary's married sister. Sandburg (1926), pp. 50–51. While preparing for the nuptials and feeling anxiety again, Lincoln, when asked where he was going, replied, "To hell, I suppose." Donald (1996), p. 93. In 1844, the couple bought Lincoln Home National Historic Site|a house in Springfield near Lincoln's law office. Mary Todd Lincoln kept house, often with the help of a relative or hired servant girl. Baker, p. 142. Robert Todd Lincoln was born in 1843 and Edward Baker Lincoln (Eddie) in 1846. Lincoln "was remarkably fond of children", White, p. 126. and the Lincolns were not considered to be strict with their children. Baker, p. 120. Edward died on February 1, 1850, in Springfield, likely of tuberculosis. William Wallace  Lincoln was born on December 21, 1850, and died on February 20, 1862. The Lincolns' fourth son, Tad Lincoln|Thomas "Tad" Lincoln, was born on April 4, 1853, and died of heart failure at the age of 18 on July 16, 1871. White, pp. 179–181, 476. Robert was the only child to live to adulthood and have children. His last descenda
Aristotle	{"City":["Athens","Chicago","Nuremberg","Oxford","Stageira"],"Organization":["Catholic Church","Congress","Platonic  Academy","School of Athens","University of California Press","University of Chicago Press"],"Country":["United Kingdom"],"Company":["California Press Ltd."],"Person":["Aristotle Aristotle","Bertrand Russell","Felix Jacoby","Francesco Hayez","Hildegard Temporini","Jonathan Barnes","Peter Green","Philip II","Roman Biography","William George","Wolfgang Haase  Aristotle"],"State":["British Columbia"]}	Aristotle (,  (384 BC – 322 BC) That these undisputed dates (the first half of the Olympiad year 384/3, and in 322 shortly before the death of Demosthenes) are correct was shown already by August Boeckh ("Kleine Schriften" VI 195); for further discussion, see Felix Jacoby on "FGrHist" 244 F 38. Ingemar Düring, "Aristotle in the Ancient Biographical Tradition", Göteborg, 1957, p. 253. was a Greeks|Greek  and polymath, a student of Plato and teacher of Alexander the Great. His writings cover many subjects, including Physics  metaphysics, Poetics  theater, music, logic, rhetoric, linguistics, politics, government, ethics, biology, and zoology. Together with Plato and Socrates (Plato's teacher), Aristotle is one of the most important founding figures in Western philosophy. Aristotle's writings were the first to create a comprehensive system of Western philosophy, encompassing morality, aesthetics, logic, science, politics, and metaphysics. Aristotle's views on the Aristotelian  sciences profoundly shaped medieval scholarship, and their influence extended well into the Renaissance, although they were ultimately replaced by Classical  physics. In the zoological sciences, some of his observations were confirmed to be accurate only in the 19th century. His works contain the earliest known formal study of logic, which was incorporated in the late 19th century into modern formal logic. In metaphysics,  had a profound influence on Judeo-Islamic philosophies (800 -  and theological thinking in the Islamic and Jewish traditions in the Middle Ages, and it continues to influence Christian theology, especially the  tradition of the Catholic Church. His ethics, though always influential, gained renewed interest with the modern advent of virtue ethics. All aspects of Aristotle's philosophy continue to be the object of active academic study today. Though Aristotle wrote many elegant treatises and dialogues (Cicero described his literary style as "a river of gold"), it is thought that the majority of his writings are now lost and only about one-third of the original works have survived. Jonathan Barnes, "Life and Work" in "The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle" (1995), p. 9. ==Life== Aristotle, whose name means "the best purpose," was born in Stageira, Chalcidice, in 384 BC, about east of modern-day Thessaloniki. His father Nicomachus (father of  was the personal physician to Amyntas III of Macedon|King Amyntas of Macedon. Aristotle was trained and educated as a member of the aristocracy. At about the age of eighteen, he went to Athens to continue his education at Platonic  Academy. Aristotle remained at the academy for nearly twenty years before quitting Athens in 348/47 BC. The traditional story about his departure reports that he was disappointed with the direction the academy took after control passed to Plato's nephew Speusippus upon his death, although it is possible that he feared  sentiments and left before Plato had died. name="Lord  Carnes Lord, Introduction to "The Politics", by Aristotle (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984). He then traveled with Xenocrates to the court of his friend Hermias of Atarneus in Asia Minor. While in Asia, Aristotle traveled with Theophrastus to the island of Lesbos Island|Lesbos, where together they researched the botany and zoology of the island. Aristotle married Hermias's adoptive daughter (or niece) Pythias. She bore him a daughter, whom they named Pythias. Soon after Hermias' death, Aristotle was invited by Philip II of Macedon to become the tutor to his son Alexander the Great in 343 BC.  Bertrand Russell, "A History of Western Philosophy", Simon & Schuster, 1972 File:Arabic  Islamic portrayal of Aristotle Aristotle was appointed as the head of the royal academy of Macedon. During that time he gave lessons not only to Alexander, but also to two other future kings: Ptolemy I Soter|Ptolemy and Cassander. Aristotle encouraged Alexander toward eastern conquest, and his attitude towards Persia was unabashedly ethnocentric. In one famous example, he counsels Alexander to be 'a leader to the Greeks and a despot to the barbarians, to look after the former as after friends and relatives, and to deal with the latter as with beasts or plants'. Peter Green, "Alexander of Macedon", 1991 University of California Press, Ltd. Oxford, England. Library of Congress  Data, p.58–59 By 335 BC he had returned to Athens, establishing his own school there known as the Lyceum  Aristotle conducted courses at the school for the next twelve years. While in Athens, his wife Pythias died and Aristotle became involved with Herpyllis of Stageira, who bore him a son whom he named after his father, Nicomachus (son of  According to the Suda, he also had an eromenos,  of Abydus. William George  of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology", vol. 3,  p. 88] It is during this period in Athens from 335 to 323 BC when Aristotle is believed to have composed many of his works.  Aristotle wrote many dialogues, only fragments of which survived. The works that have survived are in treatise form and were not, for the most part, intended for widespread publication, as they are generally thought to be lecture aids for his students. His most important treatises include "Physics  "Metaphysics  "Nicomachean Ethics", "Politics  "De Anima (On the Soul)" and "Poetics  Aristotle not only studied almost every subject possible at the time, but made significant contributions to most of them. In physical science, Aristotle studied anatomy, astronomy, embryology, geography, geology, meteorology, physics and zoology. In philosophy, he wrote on aesthetics, ethics, government, metaphysics, politics, economics, psychology, rhetoric and theology. He also studied education, foreign customs, literature and poetry. His combined works constitute a virtual encyclopedia of Greek knowledge. It has been suggested that Aristotle was probably the last person to know everything there was to be known in his own time. Near the end of Alexander's life, Alexander began to suspect plots against himself, and threatened Aristotle in letters. Aristotle had made no secret of his contempt for Alexander's pretense of divinity, and the king had executed Aristotle's grandnephew Callisthenes as a traitor. A widespread tradition in antiquity suspected Aristotle of playing a role in Alexander's death, but there is little evidence for this. Peter Green, "Alexander of Macedon", 1991 University of California Press, Ltd. Oxford, England. Library of Congress  Data, p.379,459 Upon Alexander's death,  sentiment in Athens once again flared. Eurymedon the hierophant denounced Aristotle for not holding the gods in honor. Aristotle fled the city to his mother's family estate in Chalcis, explaining, "I will not allow the Athenians to sin twice against philosophy," "Vita Marciana" 41, cf. Claudius  "Varia historica" 3.36, Ingemar Düring, "Aristotle in the Ancient Biographical Tradition", Göteborg, 1957, T44a-e. a reference to Athens's prior Trial of Socrates|trial and execution of Socrates. He died in Euboea of natural causes within the year (in 322 BC). Aristotle named chief executor his student Antipater and left a Will (law)|will in which he asked to be buried next to his wife. Aufstieg und Niedergang der römischen Welt by Hildegard Temporini, Wolfgang Haase  Aristotle's Will] ==Thought== ===Logic=== File:Aristotle in Nuremberg  portrayed in the 1493 "Nuremberg Chronicle" as a  scholar With the "Prior Analytics", Aristotle is credited with the earliest study of formal logic, and his conception of it was the dominant form of Western logic until 19th century advances in mathematical logic. Kant stated in the "Critique of Pure Reason" that Aristotle's theory of logic completely accounted for the core of deductive inference.  Aristotle "says that 'on the subject of reasoning' he 'had nothing else on an earlier date to speak of'". However, Plato reports that syntax was devised before him, by Prodicus of Ceos, who was concerned by the correct use of words. Logic seems to have emerged from dialectics; the earlier philosophers made frequent use of concepts like "reductio ad absurdum" in their discussions, but never truly understood the logical implications. Even Plato had difficulties with logic; although he had a reasonable conception of a deductive system, he could never actually construct one and relied instead on his dialectic.   Bocheński, 1951. Plato believed that deduction would simply follow from premises, hence he focused on maintaining solid premises so that the Logical  would logically follow. Consequently, Plato realized that a method for obtaining conclusions would be most beneficial. He never succeeded in devising such a method, but his best attempt was published in his book "Sophist  where he introduced his division method. ====Analytics and the "Organon"==== What we today call "Aristotelian logic", Aristotle himself would have labeled "analytics". The term "logic" he reserved to mean "dialectics". Most of Aristotle's work is probably not in its original form, since it was most likely edited by students and later lecturers. The logical works of Aristotle were compiled into six books in about the early 1st century AD: #"Categories" #"On  #"Prior Analytics" #"Posterior Analytics" #"Topics" #"On Sophistical Refutations" The order of the books (or the teachings from which they are composed) is not certain, but this list was derived from analysis of Aristotle's writings. It goes from the basics, the analysis of simple terms in the "Categories," the analysis of propositions and their elementary relations in "On  to the study of more complex forms, namely, syllogisms (in the "Analytics") and dialectics (in the "Topics" and "Sophistical Refutations"). The first three treatises form the core of the logical theory "stricto sensu": the grammar of the language of logic and the correct rules of reasoning. There is one volume of Aristotle's concerning logic not found in the "Organon", namely the fourth book of "Metaphysics."   ===Aristotle's scientific method=== File:Sanzio 01 Plato  (left) and Aristotle (right), a detail of "The School of Athens" <!-- this should link to an article about the famous artwork  , a fresco by Raphael. Aristotle gestures to the earth, representing his belief in knowledge through empirical observation and experience, while holding a copy of his "Nicomachean Ethics" in his hand, whilst Plato gestures to the heavens, representing his belief in The Forms. File:Francesco Hayez  by Francesco Hayez (1791–1882) Like his teacher Plato, Aristotle's philosophy aims at the Universality  Aristotle, however, found the universal in particular things, which he called the essence of things, while Plato finds that the universal exists apart from particular things, and is related to them as their prototype or exemplar. For Aristotle, therefore, philosophic method implies the ascent from the study of particular phenomena to the knowledge of essences, while for Plato philosophic method means the descent from a knowledge of universal Theory of Forms|Forms (or ideas) to a contemplation of particular imitations of these. For Aristotle, "form" still refers to the unconditional basis of phenomena but is "instantiated" in a particular substance (see  and  and particulars", below). In a certain sense, Aristotle's method is both Inductive  and Deductive  while Plato's is essentially deductive from "A priori and a posteriori (philosophy)|a priori" principles. In Aristotle's terminology, "natural philosophy" is a branch of philosophy examining the phenomena of the natural world, and includes fields that would be regarded today as physics, biology and other natural sciences. In modern times, the scope of "philosophy" has become limited to more generic or abstract inquiries, such as ethics and metaphysics, in which logic plays a major role. Today's philosophy tends to exclude empirical study of the natural world by means of the scientific m
International Atomic Time	{"City":["BIPM","Boulder","NICT"],"Organization":["International Bureau of Weights and Measures","International Time Bureau","National Bureau of Standards"],"Country":["France","Japan","United Kingdom"],"Company":["Frequency Section - National Physical Laboratory","National Physical Laboratory","United Physical Laboratory"],"Person":["Julian Dates"],"State":["Colorado"]}	International Atomic Time ( TAI , from the French  name Temps Atomique International ) is a high-precision atomic coordinate  time standard based on the notional passage of proper time on Earth's geoid. It is the basis for Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), which is used for civil timekeeping all over the Earth's surface, and for Terrestrial Time, which is used for astronomical calculations. Since 30 June 2012 when the last leap second was added,  TAI has been exactly 35 seconds ahead of UTC. The 35 seconds results from the initial difference of 10 seconds at the start of 1972, plus 25 leap seconds in UTC since 1972. Time coordinates on the TAI scales are conventionally specified using traditional means of specifying days, carried over from non-uniform time standards based on the rotation of the Earth. Specifically, both Julian Dates and the Gregorian calendar are used. TAI in this form was synchronised with Universal Time at the beginning of 1958, and the two have drifted apart ever since, due to the changing motion of the Earth. ==Operation== TAI as a time scale is a weighted average of the time kept by over 200 atomic clocks in over 50 national laboratories worldwide. BIPM - International Atomic Time n.d. The clocks are compared using GPS signals and Two-Way Satellite Time and Frequency Transfer. Circular T 2009. Due to the averaging it is far more stable than any clock would be alone (see signal averaging for a discussion). The majority of the clocks are caesium clocks; the definition of the SI second is written in terms of caesium. McCarthy &Seidelmann 2009, 207, 214 The participating institutions each broadcast, in real time, a frequency signal with time codes, which is their estimate of TAI. Time codes are usually published in the form of UTC, which differs from TAI by a well-known integer number of seconds. These time scales are denoted in the form "UTC(NPL)" in the UTC form, where "NPL" in this case identifies the National Physical Laboratory, UK. The TAI form may be denoted "TAI(NPL)". The latter is not to be confused with "TA(NPL)", which denotes an independent atomic time scale, not synchronised to TAI or to anything else. The clocks at different institutions are regularly compared against each other. The International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM, France), combines these measurements to  calculate the weighted average that forms the most stable time scale possible. This combined time scale is published monthly in  Circular T], and is the Canonical form|canonical TAI. This time scale is expressed in the form of tables of differences UTC-UTC("k") (equivalent to TAI-TAI("k")) for each participating institution "k". (The same circular also gives tables of TAI-TA("k"), for the various unsynchronised atomic time scales.) Errors in publication may be corrected by issuing a revision of the faulty Circular T or by errata in a subsequent Circular T. Aside from this, once published in Circular T the TAI scale is not revised. In hindsight it is possible to discover errors in TAI, and to make better estimates of the true proper time scale. Doing so does not create another version of TAI; it is instead considered to be creating a better realisation of Terrestrial Time (TT). ==History== Atomic timekeeping services started experimentally in 1955, using the first caesium atomic clock at the National Physical Laboratory (United  Physical Laboratory, UK (NPL). Early atomic time scales consisted of quartz clocks with frequencies calibrated by a single atomic clock; the atomic clocks were not operated continuously. The "Greenwich Atomic" (GA) scale began in 1955 at the Royal Greenwich Observatory. The United States Naval Observatory began the A.1 scale 13 September 1956, using an Atomichron commercial atomic clock, followed by the NBS-A scale at the National Bureau of Standards, Boulder,  Colorado. The International Time Bureau (BIH) began a time scale, T  m  or AM, in July 1955, using both local caesium clocks and comparisons to distant clocks using the phase of VLF radio signals. Both the BIH scale and A.1 was defined by an epoch (reference date)|epoch at the beginning of 1958: it was set to read Julian Date 2436204.5 (1 January 1958 00:00:00) at the corresponding UT2 instant. The procedures used by the BIH evolved, and the name for the time scale changed: "A3" in 1963 and "TA(BIH)" in 1969. McCarthy & Seidelmann 2009, 199&ndash;201. This  was inevitably imperfect, depending as it did on the  realisation of UT2. At the time, UT2 as published by various observatories differed by several centiseconds. The SI second was defined in terms of the caesium atom in 1967, and in 1971 it was renamed International Atomic Time (TAI). McCarthy & Seidelmann 2009, 202&ndash;4. Also in 1961, UTC began. UTC is a discontinuous time scale composed from segments that are linear  of atomic time, the  being arranged so that UTC approximated UT2 until the end of 1971, and UT1 thereafter. This was a compromise arrangement for a broadcast time scale: a linear transformation of the BIH's atomic time meant that the time scale was stable and  synchronised, while approximating UT1 means that tasks such as navigation which require a source of Universal Time continue to be well served by public time broadcasts. McCarthy & Seidelmann 2009, 227&ndash;9. In the 1970s, it became clear that the clocks participating in TAI were ticking at different rates due to gravitational time dilation, and the combined TAI scale therefore corresponded to an average of the altitudes of the various clocks. Starting from Julian Date 2443144.5 (1 January 1977 00:00:00), corrections were applied to the output of all participating clocks, so that TAI would correspond to proper time at mean sea level (the geoid). Because the clocks had been on average well above sea level, this meant that TAI slowed down, by about 10  −12  . The former uncorrected time scale continues to be published, under the name "EAL" ("Echelle Atomique Libre", meaning "Free Atomic Scale"). McCarthy & Seidelmann, 215. The instant that the gravitational correction started to be applied serves as the epoch for Barycentric Coordinate Time (TCB), Geocentric Coordinate Time (TCG), and Terrestrial Time (TT). All three of these time scales were defined to read JD  (1 January 1977 00:00:32.184) exactly at that instant. (The offset is to provide continuity with the older Ephemeris Time.) TAI was henceforth a realisation of TT, with the equation TT(TAI) = TAI + 32.184 s. McCarthy & Seidelmann, 218&ndash;9. The continued existence of TAI was questioned in a 2007 letter from the BIPM to the ITU-R which stated "In the case of a redefinition of UTC without leap seconds, the CCTF would consider discussing the possibility of suppressing TAI, as it would remain parallel to the continuous UTC." CCTF 09-27 ==See also== * Time and frequency transfer * Clock  * Network Time Protocol * Precision Time Protocol, a related though separate technology *  trap ==Notes== ==References== * * * * * * ==External links== *  Bureau International des Poids et Mesures: TAI] *  Time and Frequency Section - National Physical Laboratory, UK] *  IERS website] *  NIST Time and Frequency FAQs] *  History of time scales] *  NIST cesium fountain standard] *  Optical frequency comb for metrology and timekeeping] *  Japan Standard Time Project, NICT, Japan] Category:Time scales ar:توقيت ذري عالمي ca:Temps atòmic internacional  atomový čas  Atomzeit es:Tiempo Atómico Internacional eo:Tempo atoma internacia fr:Temps atomique international   atomsko vrijeme id:Waktu Atom Internasional it:Tempo atomico internazionale he:הזמן האטומי  la:Tempus Atomicum Internationale lt:Atominis laikas hu:Nemzetközi atomidő   czas atomowy pt:Tempo Atômico Internacional ro:Timpul atomic internațional  атомное время  atómový čas sl:Mednarodni atomski čas  atomtid ur:عالمی جوہری وقت vi:Thời gian Nguyên tử Quốc tế zh:原子时
Altruism	{"City":null,"Organization":null,"Country":null,"Company":["Altruism"],"Person":["Auguste Comte","Marcel Mauss","Mark van Vugt","Pat Barcaly","Wendy Iredal"],"State":null}	File:Belisaire demandant l'aumone Jacques-Louis  alms to the poor is often considered an altruistic action in many cultures and religions. Altruism is a concern for the Quality of life|welfare of others. It is a traditional virtue in many cultures, and a core aspect of various religious traditions, though the concept of 'others' toward whom concern should be directed can vary among cultures and religions. Altruism is the opposite of selfishness. Altruism can be distinguished from feelings of duty and loyalty. Altruism is a motivation to provide something of value to a party who must be anyone but the self, while duty focuses on a moral obligation towards a specific individual (for example, a god, a monarch|king), or collective (for example, a government). Pure altruism consists of sacrificing something for someone other than the self (e.g. sacrificing time, energy or possessions) with no expectation of any compensation or benefits, either direct, or indirect (for instance from recognition of the giving). Much debate exists as to whether true altruism is possible. Arguably, the act of sharing, helping or sacrificing may be primarily motivated by the gratification it returns. This seems to assume a different understanding of 'benefits', though, from the traditionally assumed meanings (which are external - recognition from others, reciprocation etc. - rather than internal), making this a problematic argument. The term "altruism" may also refer to an altruism  doctrine that claims that individuals are morally obliged to benefit others. Used in this sense, it is the opposite of ethical egoism|egoism. ==The notion of altruism== The concept has a long history in  and Ethics|ethical thought. The term was originally coined in the 19th century by the founding sociologist and philosopher of science, Auguste Comte, and has become a major topic for psychologists (especially evolutionary psychology researchers), evolutionary biologists, and  While ideas about altruism from one field can have an impact on the other fields, the different methods and focuses of these fields lead to different perspectives on altruism. In simple terms altruism is caring about the welfare of other people and acting to help them. ==Scientific viewpoints==  Marcel Mauss's book "The Gift" contains a passage: "Note on alms". This note describes the evolution of the notion of alms (and by extension of altruism) from the notion of sacrifice.  Alms are the fruits of a moral notion of the gift and of fortune on the one hand, and of a notion of sacrifice, on the other. Generosity is an obligation, because Nemesis avenges the poor and the gods for the superabundance of happiness and wealth of certain people who should rid themselves of it. This is the ancient morality of the gift, which has become a principle of justice. The gods and the spirits accept that the share of wealth and happiness that has been offered to them and had been hitherto destroyed in useless sacrifices should serve the poor and children.  * Compare altruism  (ethics) – perception of altruism as  * Compare  of alms in various scriptures.   In the science of ethology (the study of animal behaviour), and more generally in the study of social evolution, altruism refers to behaviour by an individual that increases the fitness  of another individual while decreasing the fitness of the actor.  In evolutionary psychology this may be applied to a wide range of human behaviors such as charity, emergency aid, help to coalition partners, tipping, courtship gifts, production of public goods, and   Pat Barcaly. The evolution of charitable behaviour and the power of reputation. In Theories of apparently altruistic behavior were accelerated by the need to produce theories compatible with evolutionary origins. Two related strands of research on altruism have emerged from traditional evolutionary analyses and from game theory. Some of the proposed mechanisms are: * Kin selection. That animals and humans are more altruistic towards close kin than to distant kin and non-kin has been confirmed in numerous studies across many different cultures. Even subtle cues indicating kinship may unconsciously increase altruistic behavior. One kinship cue is facial resemblance. One study found that slightly altering photographs so that they more closely resembled the faces of the study participants increased the trust the participants expressed regarding the depicted persons. Another cue is having the same family name, especially if rare, and this has been found to increase helping behavior. Another study found more cooperative behavior the greater the number the perceived kin in a group. Using kinship terms in political speeches increased audience agreement with the speaker in one study. This effect was especially strong for firstborn who are known to typically be close to their families.  * Vested interests. People are likely to themselves suffer if their friends, allies, and similar social ingroups suffer or even disappear. Helping such group members may therefore eventually be beneficial for the altruist. Making ingroup membership more noticeable increases  Extreme self-sacrifice towards the ingroup may be adaptive if a hostile outgroup threatens to kill the entire ingroup.  * Reciprocal altruism. See also Reciprocity (evolution). :* Direct Reciprocity (social  Research shows that if can be beneficial to help others if there is a chance that they can and will reciprocate the help. The effective tit for tat strategy is one game theory|game theoretic example. Many people seem to be following a similar strategy by cooperating if and only if others cooperate in return.  ::One consequence is that people are more cooperative if it is more likely that individuals will interact again in the future. People tend to be less cooperative if they perceive that the frequency of helpers in the population is lower. They tend to help less if they see  by others and this effect tend to be stronger than the opposite effect of seeing cooperative behaviors. Simply changing the cooperative framing of a proposal may increase  such as calling it a "Community Game" instead of a "Wall Street Game".  ::A tendency towards reciprocity implies that people will feel obligated to respond if someone helps them. This has been used by some charities which give small gifts to potential donors thereby hoping to induce reciprocity. Another method is to announce publicly that someone has given a large donation. The tendency to reciprocate can even generalize so people become more helpful against others in general after being helped. On the other hand, people will avoid or even retaliate against those perceived to no be cooperating. People sometimes by mistake do not help when they intended to or the helping may not be noticed which may cause unintended conflicts. As such, it may be an optimal strategy to be slightly forgiving of and have a slightly generous interpretation of   ::People are more likely to cooperate on a task if they can communicate with one another first. This may be due to better assessments of  or due to exchange of promises. They are more cooperative if they can gradually build trust instead of asked to immediately give extensive help. Direct reciprocity and cooperation in a group can be increased by changing the focus and incentives from intragroup competition to larger scale competitions such as between groups or against the general population. Thus giving grades and promotions based only on an individual's performance relative to a small local group, as is common, may reduce cooperative behaviors in the group.  :* Indirect reciprocity. The avoidance of poor reciprocators and cheaters causes a person's reputation to become very important. A person with a good reputation for reciprocity have a higher chance of receiving help even from persons they have had no direct interactions with previously.  :* Strong reciprocity. A form of reciprocity where some individuals seem to spend more resources on cooperating and punishing than would be most beneficial as predicted by several established theories of altruism. A number of theories have been proposed as explanations as well as criticisms regarding its existence. :*  An organism behaves altruistically and the recipient does not reciprocate but has an increased chance of acting in a way that is selfish but also as a byproduct benefits the altruist. * Signalling theory|Costly signaling and the handicap principle. Since altruism takes away resources from the altruist it can be a "honest signal" of resource availability and the abilities needed to gather resources. This may signal to others that the altruist is a valuable potential partner. It may also be a signal of interactive and cooperative intententions since those not interacting further in the future gain nothing from the costly signaling. It is unclear if costly signaling can indicate a long-term cooperative personality but people have increased trust for those who help. Costly signaling is pointless if everyone has the same traits, resources, and cooperative intentions but becomed a potentially more important signal if the population increasingly varies on these   :Hunters widely sharing the meat has been seen as a costly signal of ability and research has found that good hunters have higher reproductive success and more adulterous relations even if they themselves receive no more of the hunted meat than anyone else. Similarly, holding large feasts and giving large donations has been seen as ways of demonstrating one's resources. Heroic risk-taking has also been interpreted as a costly signal of ability.  :Both indirect reciprocity and costly signaling depend on the value of reputation and tend to make similar predictions. One is that people will be more helping when they know that their helping behavior will be communicated to people they will interact with later, is publicly announced, is discussed, or is simply being observed by someone else. This have been documented in many studies. The effect is sensitive to subtle cues such as people being more helpful when there were stylized eyespots instead of a logo on a computer screen. Weak reputational cues such as eyespots may become unimportant if there are stronger cues present and may lose their effect with continued exposure unless reinforced with real reputational effects.  Public displays such as public weeping for dead celebrities and participation in demonstrations may be influenced by a desire to be seen as altruistic. People who know that they are publicly monitored sometimes even wastefully donate money they know are not needed by recipient which may be because of reputational concerns.  Wendy Iredal and Mark van Vugt. Altruism as showing off: a signaling perspective on promoting green behaviour and acts of kindness. In :Women have been found to find altruistic men to be attractive partners. When looking for a long-term partner more conventional altruism may be preferred which may indicate that he is also willing to share resources with her and her children while when looking for a short-term partner heroic risk-taking, which may be costly signal showing good genes, may be more preferable. Men also perform more altruistic acts in the early stages of a romantic relationship or simply when in the presence of an attractive woman. While both sexes state that kindness is the most preferable trait in a partner there is some evidence that men place less value on this than women and that women may not be more altruistic in presence of an attractive man. Men may even avoid altruistic women in short-term relationships which may be because they expect less success.   :People may compete over getting the benefits of a high reputation which may cause competitive altruism. On other hand, in some experiments a proportion of people do not seem to care about reputation and they do not help more even if this is conspicuous. This may possibly be due to r
Ayn Rand	{"City":["Chicago","Hollywood","New York","New York City"],"Organization":["Austrian School"],"Country":["Russia","United Kingdom","United States"],"Company":["Anthem","Bobbs-Merrill Company","Paramount Pictures","Universal Studios","Warner Bros."],"Person":["Alexander Kerensky","Alisa Zinov'yevna","Alisa Zinov'yevna Rosenbaum","Anna Borisovna Rosenbaum","Archibald Ogden","Ayn Rand","Cecil B. DeMille","Edmond Rostand","Frank O'Connor","Friedrich Nietzsche","Friedrich Schiller","Fyodor Dostoevsky","Hal Wallis","Henry Hazlitt","Howard Roark","Isabel Paterson","Ludwig von Mises","Richard E. \"Publishing \"Anthem","Richard E. \"Publishing \"We","Victor Hugo","Wendell Willkie","Zinovy Zakharovich Rosenbaum"],"State":["California"]}	Ayn Rand (; ; born Alisa Zinov'yevna Rosenbaum , – March 6, 1982) was a  novelist, philosopher, <!-- DO NOT REMOVE WITHOUT CONSENSUS  ; ; ; . playwright, and screenwriter. She is known for her two best-selling novels "The Fountainhead" and "Atlas Shrugged" and for developing a philosophical system she called Objectivism (Ayn  Born and educated in Russia, Rand moved to the United States in 1926. She worked as a screenwriter in Hollywood and had a play produced on Broadway in 1935–1936. After two early novels that were initially less successful, she achieved fame with her 1943 novel "The Fountainhead". In 1957, she published her best-known work, the philosophical novel "Atlas Shrugged". Afterward she turned to nonfiction to promote her philosophy, publishing her own magazines and releasing several collections of essays until her death in 1982. Rand advocated reason as the only means of acquiring knowledge and rejected all forms of faith and religion. She supported rational  and ethical egoism, and rejected ethical altruism. In politics, she condemned the initiation of force as immoral and opposed all forms of collectivism and statism, instead supporting  capitalism, which she believed was the only social system that protected individual rights. She promoted romantic realism in art. She was sharply critical of the philosophers and philosophical traditions known to her besides Aristotle. Rand's fiction was poorly received by many literary critics,   and academia generally ignored or rejected her philosophy. The Objectivist movement attempts to spread her ideas, both to the public and in academic settings.  She is a major influence among  and Conservatism in the United  conservatives. ==Life== ===Early life=== Rand was born Alisa Zinov'yevna Rosenbaum () on February 2, 1905, to a bourgeois family living in Saint Petersburg. She was the eldest of the three daughters of Zinovy Zakharovich Rosenbaum and Anna Borisovna Rosenbaum, largely non-observant Jews. Rand's father was a successful pharmacist, eventually owning a pharmacy and the building in which it was located. ; ; Rand was twelve at the time of the Russian Revolution of 1917, during which her sympathies were with Alexander Kerensky. Rand's family life was disrupted by the rise of the Bolshevik party under Vladimir Lenin. Her father's pharmacy was confiscated by the Bolsheviks, and the family fled to the Crimea, which was initially under the control of the White Army during the Russian Civil War. She later recalled that while in high school she determined that she was an atheist and that she valued reason above any other human attribute. After graduating from high school in the Crimea, at 16 Rand returned with her family to Petrograd (the new name for Saint Petersburg), where they faced desperate conditions, on occasion nearly starving.   engraving shows a large building along the bank of a river, with numerous people and carriages nearby|Rand completed a three-year program at Saint Petersburg State  State University. After the Russian Revolution, universities were opened to women, including Jews, allowing Rand to be in the first group of women to enroll at Saint Petersburg State  State University, where she studied in the department of social pedagogy, majoring in history. At the university she was introduced to the writings of Aristotle and Plato, who would form two of her greatest influences and  respectively. ; A third figure whose philosophical works she studied heavily was Friedrich Nietzsche. Able to read French, German and Russian, Rand also discovered the writers Fyodor Dostoevsky, Victor Hugo, Edmond Rostand, and Friedrich Schiller, who became her perennial favorites. Along with many other "bourgeois" students, Rand was purged from the university shortly before graduating. However, after complaints from a group of visiting foreign scientists, many of the purged students were allowed to complete their work and graduate, ; which Rand did in October 1924. She subsequently studied for a year at the State Technicum for Screen Arts in Leningrad. For one of her assignments, she wrote an essay about the actress Pola Negri, which became her first published work.  By this time she had decided her professional surname for writing would be "Rand", possibly as a Cyrillic contraction of her birth surname, ; and she adopted the first name "Ayn", either from a Finnish  name or from the Hebrew word ("ayin", meaning "eye"). Rand said the origin of "Ayn" was Finnish , but some biographical sources question this, suggesting it may come from a Hebrew nickname. provides a detailed discussion. File:Pola Negri by Ayn Rand  brown book cover with  drawings and text in Russian. The drawing on the left is a portrait of a woman with dark hair; the drawing on the right is of  of Rand's first published work, a 2,500-word monograph on the Polish "femme fatale" Pola Negri published in 1925.   In the fall of 1925, Rand was granted a Visa  to visit American relatives. Rand was so impressed with the skyline of Manhattan upon her arrival in New York Harbor that she cried what she later called "tears of splendor". Intent on staying in the United States to become a screenwriter, she lived for a few months with relatives in Chicago,  one of whom owned a movie theater and allowed her to watch dozens of films for free. She then set out for Hollywood, California. Initially, Rand struggled in Hollywood and took odd jobs to pay her basic living expenses. A chance meeting with famed director Cecil B. DeMille led to a job as an extra (drama)|extra in his film, "The King of Kings (1927 film)|The King of Kings", and to subsequent work as a junior screenwriter. While working on "The King of Kings", she met an aspiring young actor, Frank O'Connor; the two were married on April 15, 1929. Rand United States nationality  an American citizen in 1931. Taking various jobs during the 1930s to support her writing, Rand worked for a time as the head of the costume department at RKO Studios. ; She made several attempts to bring her parents and sisters to the United States, but they were unable to acquire permission to emigrate. ; ===Early fiction=== Rand's first literary success came with the sale of her screenplay "Red Pawn" to Universal Studios in 1932, although it was never produced. This was followed by the courtroom drama "Night of January 16th", first produced by E.E. Clive in Hollywood in 1934 and then successfully reopened on Broadway  in 1935. Each night the "jury" was selected from members of the audience, and one of the two different endings, depending on the jury's "verdict", would then be performed. In 1941, Paramount Pictures produced a movie version of the play. Rand did not participate in the production and was highly critical of the result. ; Rand's first novel, the  "We the Living", was published in 1936. Set in Russian Soviet Federative Socialist  Russia, it focused on the struggle between the individual and the state. In a 1959 foreword to the novel, Rand stated that "We the Living" "is as near to an autobiography as I will ever write. It is not an autobiography in the literal, but only in the intellectual sense. The plot is invented, the background is not..." Initial sales were slow and the American publisher let it go out of print, although European editions continued to sell. Ralston, Richard E. "Publishing "We the Living"". In After the success of her later novels, Rand was able to release a revised version in 1959 that has since sold over three million copies. Ralston, Richard E. "Publishing "We the Living"". In Without Rand's knowledge or permission, the novel was made into a pair of Italian films, "Noi vivi" and "Addio, Kira", in 1942. Rediscovered in the 1960s, these films were re-edited into a new version which was approved by Rand and re-released as "We the Living" in 1986. Her novella "Anthem  was written during a break from the writing of her next major novel, "The Fountainhead". It presents a vision of a dystopian future world in which  collectivism has triumphed to such an extent that even the word 'I' has been forgotten and replaced with 'we'. ; It was published in England in 1938, but Rand initially could not find an American publisher. As with "We the Living", Rand's later success allowed her to get a revised version published in 1946, which has sold more than 3.5 million copies. Ralston, Richard E. "Publishing "Anthem"". In ==="The Fountainhead" and political activism=== During the 1940s, Rand became politically active. Both she and her husband worked full time in volunteer positions for the 1940 Presidential campaign of Republican Wendell Willkie. This work led to Rand's first public speaking experiences, including fielding the sometimes hostile questions from New York City audiences who had just viewed pro-Willkie newsreels, an experience she greatly enjoyed. This activity also brought her into contact with other intellectuals sympathetic to free-market capitalism. She became friends with journalist Henry Hazlitt and his wife, and Hazlitt introduced her to the Austrian School economist Ludwig von Mises. Despite her philosophical differences with them, Rand strongly endorsed the writings of both men throughout her career, and both of them expressed admiration for her. Once von Mises referred to Rand as "the most courageous man in America," a compliment that particularly pleased her because he said "man" instead of "woman." ; ; Rand also developed a friendship with libertarian writer Isabel Paterson. Rand questioned the well-informed Paterson about American history and politics long into the night during their numerous meetings and gave Paterson ideas for her only nonfiction book, "The God of the Machine". Rand's first major success as a writer came with "The Fountainhead" in 1943, a romantic and philosophical novel that she wrote over a period of seven years. The novel centers on an uncompromising young architect named Howard Roark and his struggle against what Rand described as  who attempt to live through others, placing others above self. It was rejected by twelve publishers before finally being accepted by the Bobbs-Merrill Company on the insistence of editor Archibald Ogden, who threatened to quit if his employer did not publish it. While completing the novel, Rand was prescribed the amphetamine Benzedrine to fight fatigue. The drug helped her to work long hours to meet her deadline for delivering the finished novel, but when the book was done, she was so exhausted that her doctor ordered two weeks' rest. Her continued use of the drug for a number of years may have contributed to what some of her later associates described as volatile mood swings. ; "The Fountainhead" eventually became a worldwide success, bringing Rand fame and financial security. ; In 1943, Rand sold the rights for a The Fountainhead (film)|film version to Warner Bros., and she returned to Hollywood to write the screenplay. Finishing her work on that screenplay, she was hired by producer Hal Wallis as a screenwriter and script-doctor. Her work for Wallis included the screenplays for the Academy  Love Letters (1945 film)|"Love Letters" and "You Came Along". ; This role gave Rand time to work on other projects, including a planned nonfiction treatment of her philosophy to be called "The Moral Basis of  Although the planned book was never completed, a condensed version was published as an essay titled "The Only Path to Tomorrow", in the January 1944 edition of "Reader's Digest" magazine. ; While working in Hollywood, Rand extended her involvement with free-market and anti-communist activism. She became involved with the Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals, a Hollywood anti-Communist group, and wrote articles on the group's behalf. She also joined the anti-Communist American Writers Association. A visit by Isabel Paterson to meet with Rand's California associates led to a final falling out between the two when Paterson made comments
List of Atlas Shrugged characters	{"City":["Philadelphia"],"Organization":["Atlas  Henry  Henry University"],"Country":["Iceland","United States"],"Company":["Ludlow","Rearden Metal","Twentieth Century Motor Company"],"Person":["Ayn Rand","Barbara Branden","Dagny Taggart","Dominique Francon","Eddie \"Eddie\" Willers","Eddie Willers","Floyd Ferris","Francisco Domingo Carlos Andres Sebastian d'Anconia","Francisco d'Anconia","Hank Rearden","Henry \"Hank\" Rearden","Hugh Akston","James Taggart","John Galt","Kay Ludlow","Kira Argounova","Ragnar Danneskjöld","Robert Stadler","Taggart  Galt","Victor Hugo"],"State":null}	This is a list of characters in Ayn Rand's novel "Atlas Shrugged." ==Major characters== The following are major characters from the novel. Characters are listed as "major" if they meet one of the following criteria: *they are listed as "major" characters in a widely available study guide, such as CliffsNotes, SparkNotes, or Gale  "Novels for Students"; *they are listed as "primary heroic" or "arch-villain" characters in Gladstein's "The New Ayn Rand Companion"; *they are the focus of an essay in a scholarly book about the novel, such as "Essays on Ayn Rand's Atlas Shrugged" or "Ayn Rand's Atlas Shrugged".  ====Dagny Taggart====  Schilling as Dagny Taggart in the 2011 film. Dagny Taggart is the protagonist of the novel. She is Vice-President in Charge of Operations for Taggart  under her brother, James Taggart. However, due to James' incompetence, it is Dagny who is responsible for all the workings of the railroad. Dagny has three romantic relationships, each with a man of ability: Francisco d'Anconia, Hank Rearden, and John Galt. Galt marks the pinnacle of everything Dagny seeks in the world and is the kind of man alluded to in her youth when she imagines a man standing off in the distance, at the end of a great set of railroad tracks and all her struggles. The essential drama of Dagny's character is her struggle to reconcile the life she lives and the railroad which she loves with the moral code of those who wish to destroy it. She believes these destroyers simply want to heap burdens upon her for the sake of others, which she has the ability to carry. Like Hank, she believes they want to live, but are too stupid and incompetent to realize how their duties and altruistic projects impede that goal. It is not until she sees the man most important to her in the world - John Galt - strapped to a torture machine, about to be killed by the looters (who recognize, too, that he is the only man who can save them from economic collapse), that she realizes that the moral code of the looters is one of death: they recognize what is good and necessary for life, but wish to destroy it anyway. She is a typical Randian heroine, similar to Dominique Francon ("The Fountainhead") or Kira Argounova ("We the Living"). ====Francisco d'Anconia==== Francisco d'Anconia is one of the central characters in "Atlas Shrugged", and owner by inheritance of the world's largest copper mining empire. He is a childhood friend, and the first love, of Dagny Taggart. A child prodigy of exceptional talents, Francisco was dubbed the "climax" of the d'Anconia line, an already prestigious family of skilled  He attended List of locations in Atlas  Henry  Henry University and was a classmate of John Galt and Ragnar Danneskjöld and student of both Hugh Akston and Robert Stadler. He began working at a young age, while still in school, proving that he could have made a successful career on his own merits without the aid of his family's wealth and power. Francisco is one of the strikers and is slowly destroying the d'Anconia empire to put it out of the raiders' reach. His actions were designed both to "trap" looters into relying upon his worthless ventures in order to disrupt their schemes and to try to show the inevitable consequences of looting. He adopted the persona of a worthless playboy, by which he is known to the world, as an effective cover. However, he is forced to give up Dagny, knowing that she would not be ready to join the strikers. He remains deeply in love with her throughout the book, while also being a good and loyal friend of her other two lovers, Hank Rearden and John Galt. His full name is Francisco Domingo Carlos Andres Sebastian d'Anconia. ====John Galt==== The enigmatic John Galt is the primary male hero of "Atlas Shrugged." He initially appears as an unnamed menial worker for Taggart  who often dines with Eddie Willers in the employee's cafeteria, and leads Eddie to reveal important information about Dagny Taggart and Taggart  Only Eddie's side of their conversations is given in the novel. Eddie tells him which suppliers and contractors Dagny is most dependent on; these men are consistently the next to disappear. Later in the novel, the reader discovers this worker's true identity. Before working for Taggart  Galt worked as an engineer for the Twentieth Century Motor Company. While there, he invented his generator that produces electricity from static electricity in the environment. His Prototype may or may not have been completed when he left due to the management deciding on a communistic pay system. This Prototype was found by Dagny when she and Hank Rearden made a trip to the long-closed Twentieth Century Motor factory. Dagny would hire Quenten Daniels to try to figure out how the machine worked. Galt would take over the radio airwaves during Mr. Thompson's much heralded speech at the end of the book and give his long soliloquy. ====Henry "Hank" Rearden==== Henry (also known as "Hank") is one of the central characters in "Atlas Shrugged". Like many of Rand's capitalist characters, he is a self-made man. He owns the most important steel company in the United States. He invents Rearden Metal, an alloy stronger than steel (with similar properties to stainless steel). He lives in Philadelphia with his wife Lillian, his brother Philip, and his elderly mother, all of whom he supports. Hank Rearden knows something is wrong with the world but he is unable to define the problem. His friend, Francisco d'Anconia, helps him understand and by this mechanism the reader is also prepared to understand the secret when it is revealed explicitly in John Galt|Galt's Speech. Rearden also serves to illustrate Rand's Atlas  of sex|theory of sex. Lillian Rearden cannot appreciate Hank Rearden's virtues, and she is portrayed as being disgusted by sex. Dagny Taggart clearly does appreciate Rearden's virtues, and this appreciation evolves into sexual desire. Rearden is torn because he accepts the premises of the traditional view of sex as a lower instinct, but he responds sexually to Dagny, who represents his highest values. Rearden struggles to resolve this internal conflict, and in doing so, illustrates Rand's sexual theory. ====Eddie Willers==== Eddie "Eddie" Willers is the Special Assistant to the Vice-President in Charge of Operations at Taggart  He grew up with Dagny Taggart. His father and grandfather worked for the Taggarts, and he followed in their footsteps. He is completely loyal to Dagny and to Taggart  He is also secretly in love with Dagny. Willers is generally assumed to represent the common man: someone who does not possess the Promethean creative ability of The Strikers, but matches them in moral courage and is capable of appreciating and making use of their creations. He sticks it out with the railway to the bitter end, even when the old world is obviously collapsing and Dagny has shifted her attention and loyalty to saving the captive Galt. ====Ragnar  One of the original strikers, he is now world famous as a pirate. Ragnar attended List of locations in Atlas  Henry  Henry University and became friends with John Galt and Francisco d'Anconia while studying under Hugh Akston and Robert Stadler. Danneskjöld seizes relief ships that are being sent from the United States to The People's States of Europe. As the novel progresses, Danneskjöld begins to become active in American waters. Danneskjöld's action is to restore to other creative people the money, in gold, which was unjustly taken away from  their income tax payments. He explains this is not altruism; his motivation is to ensure that once those espousing Galt's philosophy are restored to their rightful place in society, they will have enough capital to rebuild the world. Kept in the background for much of the book, Danneskjöld makes a personal appearance when he risks his life to meet "Hank Rearden" in the night and hand him a bar of gold as an "advance payment" to encourage Rearden to persevere in his increasingly difficult situation. Danneskjöld is married to the actress Kay Ludlow; their relationship is kept hidden from the outside world, which only knows of Ludlow as a film star who retired and dropped out of sight. It is mentioned that some of the strikers have strong reservations about his way of "conducting the common struggle." According to Barbara Branden, who was closely associated with Rand at the time the book was written, there were sections written describing Danneskjöld's adventures at sea, which were cut from the final published text. Reedstrom, Karen.  1992 Interview with Full Context]. Barbara Branden interview in "Full Context", October 1992. Republished on  Retrieved 1 June 2007. In a 1974 comment at a lecture, Ayn Rand admitted that Danneskjöld's name was a tribute to Victor Hugo. The hero of Hugo's novel, "Hans of Iceland", becomes the first of the Counts of Danneskjöld. In the published book, Danneskjöld is always seen through the eyes of others (Dagny Taggart or Hank Rearden), except for a brief paragraph in the very last chapter.  ====James Taggart==== The President of Taggart  and the book's most important antagonist. Taggart is an expert influence peddler who is, however, incapable of making operational decisions on his own. He relies on his sister, Dagny Taggart, to actually run the railroad, but nonetheless opposes her in almost every endeavor. In a sense, he is the antithesis of Dagny. As the novel progresses, the moral philosophy of the looters is revealed: it is a code of stagnation. The goal of this code is to not exist, to not move forward, to become a zero. Taggart struggles to remain unaware that this is his goal. He maintains his pretense that he wants to live, and becomes horrified whenever his mind starts to grasp the truth about himself. This contradiction leads to the recurring absurdity of his life: the desire to destroy those on whom his life depends, and the horror that he will succeed at this. In the final chapters of the novel, he suffers a complete mental breakdown upon realizing that he can no longer deceive himself in this respect. ====Lillian Rearden==== The unsupportive wife of Hank Rearden. They have been married eight years as the novel begins. Lillian is a frigid moocher who seeks to destroy her husband. She compares being Rearden's wife with owning the world's most powerful horse. Since she cannot comfortably ride a horse that goes too fast, she must bridle it down to her level, even if that means it will never reach its full potential and its power will be grievously wasted. Lillian tolerates sex with her husband only because she is "realistic" enough to know he is just a brute who requires satisfaction of his brute instincts. She indicates that she abhors Francisco d'Anconia, because she believes he is a sexual adventurer. As her motives become more clear, Lillian is found to share the sentiments of many other moochers and their worship of destruction. Her actions are explained as the desire to destroy achievement in the false belief that such an act bestows a greatness to the destroyer equal to the accomplishment destroyed. She seeks, then, to ruin Rearden in an effort to prove her own value. Lillian achieves her goal to destroy Rearden's business, when she passes on information to James Taggart about her husband's affair. This information is used to persuade Rearden to sign the Gift Certificate (which delivers all the property rights of Rearden Metal to the looters) and thereby destroys his business. Lillian discovers that she can accomplish her goal to destroy the business but she can neither achieve the greatness she desires nor her goal to destroy Hank's character. She uses James Taggart for sex as victory and revenge against Hank and Dagny. This does give her the satisfaction she desires and she continues to manipulate Hank until he finally leaves her and joins Galt's strikers. ====Dr. Floyd Ferris==== Ferris is a biologist who works as "co-ordinator" at the State Science Ins
ASCII	{"City":["Washington","DC"],"Organization":["Pentagon"],"Country":["Canada","United Kingdom","United States","United States of America"],"Company":["American National Standards Institute Inc.","CNN","CRC Press","IBM","Information Interchange ASA","Information Systems"],"Person":["Bob Bemer","Hugh McGregor Ross","Lyndon B. Johnson","Martha M. Gray","Mary Brandel","Ross Code","Sawyer A. Sawyer","Steven George Krantz"],"State":null}	Image:ASCII Code  128 ASCII characters including non-printable  128 ASCII characters, including non-printable characters (represented by their  <br  The 95 ASCII graphic characters are numbered from 20    to 7E    (decimal 32 to 126). The space character is considered a non-printing graphic.   "RFC 20: ASCII format for Network Interchange"], ANSI X3.4-1968, October 16, 1969.   The American Standard Code for Information Interchange ( ASCII , ;  Audio pronunciation for ASCII]. "Merriam Webster". Accessed 2008-04-14. ) is a character  scheme originally based on the English alphabet. ASCII codes represent character  in computers,  equipment, and other devices that use text. Most modern  schemes are based on ASCII, though they support many additional characters. ASCII developed from Telegraph  codes. Its first commercial use was as a seven-bit teleprinter code promoted by Bell data services. Work on the ASCII standard began on October 6, 1960, with the first meeting of the American Standards Association's (ASA) X3.2 subcommittee. The first edition of the standard was published during 1963,  Mary Brandel (July 6, 1999).  1963: The Debut of ASCII]: "CNN". Accessed 2008-04-14. American Standard Code for Information Interchange, ASA X3.4-1963, American Standards Association, June 17, 1963 a major revision during 1967, USA Standard Code for Information Interchange, USAS X3.4-1967, United States of America Standards Institute, July 7, 1967 and the most recent update during 1986. American National Standard for Information Systems — Coded Character Sets — 7-Bit American National Standard Code for Information Interchange (7-Bit ASCII), ANSI X3.4-1986, American National Standards Institute, Inc., March 26, 1986 Compared to earlier telegraph codes, the proposed Bell code and ASCII were both ordered for more convenient sorting (i.e.,  of lists and added features for devices other than teleprinters. ASCII includes definitions for 128 characters: 33 are non-printing control characters (many now obsolete)  that affect how text and space is processed International Organization for  (December 1, 1975).  The set of control characters for ISO 646]". "Internet Assigned Numbers Authority Registry". Alternate U.S. version:  Accessed 2008-04-14. and 95 printable characters, including the space  (which is considered an invisible graphic    ). The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority|IANA prefers the name US-ASCII name="IANA"  to avoid ambiguity. ASCII was the most commonly used character encoding on the World Wide Web until December 2007, when it was surpassed by UTF-8. ==History== Image:ASCII Code Chart-Quick ref  US ASCII 1968 Code Chart was structured with two columns of control characters, a column with special characters, a column with numbers, and four columns of letters The American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) was developed under the auspices of a committee of the American Standards Association, called the X3 committee, by its X3.2 (later X3L2) subcommittee, and later by that subcommittee's X3.2.4 working group. The ASA became the United States of America Standards Institute or USASI Mackenzie, p.211. and ultimately the American National Standards Institute. The X3.2 subcommittee designed ASCII based on earlier teleprinter encoding systems. Like other character encodings, ASCII specifies a correspondence between digital bit patterns and character  symbols (i.e. graphemes and control characters). This allows digital devices to communicate with each other and to process, store, and communicate  information such as written language. Before ASCII was developed, the encodings in use included 26 English  characters, 10 numerical digits, and from 11 to 25 special graphic symbols. To include all these, and control characters compatible with the CCITT|Comité Consultatif International Téléphonique et  standard, Fieldata, and early EBCDIC, more than 64 codes were required for ASCII. The committee debated the possibility of a shift key function (like the Baudot code), which would allow more than 64 codes to be represented by six bits. In a shifted code, some character codes determine choices between options for the following character codes. It allows compact encoding, but is less reliable for data transmission; an error in transmitting the shift code typically makes a long part of the transmission unreadable. The standards committee decided against shifting, and so ASCII required at least a seven-bit code. Decision 4. Mackenzie, p.215. The committee considered an eight-bit code, since eight bits (octet  would allow two four-bit patterns to efficiently encode two digits with binary coded decimal. However, it would require all data transmission to send eight bits when seven could suffice. The committee voted to use a seven-bit code to minimize costs associated with data transmission. Since perforated tape at the time could record eight bits in one position, it also allowed for a parity bit for error checking if desired. Decision 5. Mackenzie, p.217. Eight-bit machines (with octets as the native data type) that did not use parity checking typically set the eighth bit to 0. Sawyer A. Sawyer and Steven George Krantz (January 1, 1995). "A Tex Primer for Scientists". CRC Press. ISBN 0-8493-7159-7. p.13. The code itself was patterned so that most control codes were together, and all graphic codes were together, for ease of  The first two columns (32 positions) were reserved for control characters. Decision 8,9. Mackenzie, p.220. The Space  character had to come before graphics to make sorting  easier, so it became position 20    ; Decision 10. Mackenzie, p.237. for the same reason, many special signs commonly used as separators were placed before digits. The committee decided it was important to support upper case sixbit code  alphabets, and chose to pattern ASCII so it could be reduced easily to a usable 64-character set of graphic codes. Decision 14. Mackenzie, p.228. Lower case letters were therefore not interleaved with upper case. To keep options available for lower case letters and other graphics, the special and numeric codes were arranged before the letters, and the letter "A" was placed in position 41    to match the draft of the corresponding British standard. Decision 18. Mackenzie, p.238. The digits 0–9 were arranged so they correspond to values in binary prefixed with 011, making conversion with binary-coded decimal  Many of the  characters were positioned to correspond to their shifted position on typewriters. Thus #, $ and % were placed to correspond to 3, 4, and 5 in the adjacent column. The parentheses could not correspond to 9 and 0, however, because the place corresponding to 0 was taken by the space character. Since many European typewriters placed the parentheses with 8 and 9, those corresponding positions were chosen for the parentheses. The @ symbol was not used in continental Europe and the committee expected it would be replaced by an accented À in the French variation, so the @ was placed in position 40    next to the letter A. Mackenzie, p.243. The control codes felt essential for data transmission were the start of message (SOM), end of address (EOA), End of Message|end of message (EOM), end of transmission (EOT), "who are you?" (WRU), "are you?" (RU), a reserved device control (DC0), synchronous idle (SYNC), and acknowledge (ACK). These were positioned to maximize the Hamming distance between their bit patterns. Mackenzie, p.243-245. With the other special characters and control codes filled in, ASCII was published as ASA X3.4-1963, leaving 28 code positions without any assigned meaning, reserved for future  and one unassigned control code. Mackenzie, p.66, 245. There was some debate at the time whether there should be more control characters rather than the lower case alphabet. Mackenzie, p.435. The indecision did not last long: during May 1963 the CCITT Working Party on the New Telegraph Alphabet proposed to assign lower case characters to columns 6 and 7, Brief Report: Meeting of CCITT Working Party on the New Telegraph Alphabet, May 13–15, 1963. and International Organization for  TC 97 SC 2 voted during October to incorporate the change into its draft standard. Report of ISO/TC/97/SC 2 – Meeting of October 29–31, 1963. The X3.2.4 task group voted its approval for the change to ASCII at its May 1963 meeting. Report on Task Group X3.2.4, June 11, 1963, Pentagon Building, Washington, DC. Locating the lowercase letters in columns 6 and 7 caused the characters to differ in bit pattern from the upper case by a single bit, which simplified  character matching and the construction of keyboards and printers. The X3 committee made other changes, including other new characters (the bracket|brace and vertical line characters), Report of Meeting No. 8, Task Group X3.2.4, December 17 and 18, 1963 renaming some control characters (SOM became start of header (SOH)) and moving or removing others (RU was removed). Mackenzie, p.247–248. ASCII was subsequently updated as USASI X3.4-1967, then USASI X3.4-1968, ANSI X3.4-1977, and finally, ANSI X3.4-1986 (the first two are occasionally retronamed ANSI X3.4-1967, and ANSI X3.4-1968). The X3 committee also addressed how ASCII should be transmitted (least significant bit first), and how it should be recorded on perforated tape. They proposed a 9-track standard for magnetic tape, and attempted to deal with some forms of punched card formats. ASCII itself was first used commercially during 1963 as a seven-bit teleprinter code for American Telephone & Telegraph's TWX  eXchange) network. TWX originally used the earlier five-bit Baudot code, which was also used by the competing Telex teleprinter system. Bob Bemer introduced features such as the Escape  sequence.  His British colleague Hugh McGregor Ross helped to popularize this  to Bemer, "so much so that the code that was to become ASCII was first called the Bemer-Ross Code in Europe". Bob Bemer (n.d.).  Bemer meets Europe].  Accessed 2008-04-14. Employed at IBM at that time Because of his extensive work on ASCII, Bemer has been called "the father of ASCII."  <!-- "The endorsement of the Federal government, then the largest purchaser of computer equipment, was probably the single most important reason for the subsequent wide adoption of ASCII." – Martha M. Gray  /* ?? */  On March 11, 1968, U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson mandated that all computers purchased by the United States federal government support ASCII, stating:  I have also approved  of the Secretary of Commerce regarding standards for recording the Standard Code for Information Interchange on magnetic tapes and paper tapes when they are used in computer operations. All computers and related equipment configurations brought into the Federal Government inventory on and after July 1, 1969, must have the capability to use the Standard Code for Information Interchange and the formats prescribed by the magnetic tape and paper tape standards when these media are used. Lyndon B. Johnson (March 11, 1968).  Memorandum Approving the Adoption by the Federal Government of a Standard Code for Information Interchange]. "The American Presidency Project". Accessed 2008-04-14.  Other international standards bodies have ratified character encodings such as ISO/IEC 646 that are identical or nearly identical to ASCII, with extensions for characters outside the English alphabet and symbols used outside the United States, such as the symbol for the United Kingdom's pound sterling (£). Almost every country needed an adapted version of ASCII, since ASCII suited the needs of only the USA and a few other countries. For example, Canada had its own version that supported French characters. Other adapted encodings include ISCII (India), VISCII (Vietnam), and YUSCII (Yugoslavia). Although these encodings are sometimes referred to as ASCII, true ASCII is defined strictly only by ANSI standard. ASCII was incorporated into the Unicode
Andre Agassi	{"City":["Atlanta","Cincinnati","Key Biscayne","La Quinta","Las Vegas","Memphis","Miami"],"Organization":["Andre Agassi Charitable Foundation","Andre Agassi College Preparatory Academy in Las Vegas","Nick Bollettieri's Tennis Academy"],"Country":["Islamic Republic of Iran","United States"],"Company":["BBC","Los Angeles Times","Petr Korda","The New York Times","Volvo International","Yahoo!"],"Person":["Andre Kirk Agassi","Andrés Gómez","Boris Becker","Brad Gilbert","Chris Woodruff","Clay Court","David Wheaton","Doug Flach","Elizabeth \"Betty\" Agassi","Emmanuel  \"Mike\" Aghassian","Goran Ivanišević","Ivan Lendl","Jim Brown","Jim Courier","John Austin","John McEnroe","Lleyton Hewitt","Mats Wilander","Michael Chang","Michael Stich","Mike Agassi","Nick Bollettieri","Pete Sampras","Rafael Nadal","Sergi Bruguera","Stefan Edberg","Thomas Enqvist"],"State":["California","Florida","Nevada"]}	}} Andre Kirk Agassi (; born April 29, 1970) is a retired American  professional tennis player and former List of ATP number 1 ranked players|world no. 1.  Generally considered by critics and fellow players to be one of the greatest tennis players of all time,     "Stars pay tribute to Agassi"]. BBC. Retrieved May 15, 2010. Agassi has been called the best service returner in the history of the game.   "Reed's shotmakers: Men's return of serve"]. Yahoo! Sports. Retrieved May 15, 2010.  "Adjectives Tangled in the Net"]. "The New York Times". Retrieved May 15, 2010.  "Sampras, Agassi Have Just Begun to Fight"] "Los Angeles Times". Retrieved May 15, 2010. Described by the BBC upon his retirement as "perhaps the biggest worldwide star in the sport's history",  Agassi's performances, along with his unorthodox apparel and attitude, have seen him cited as one of the most charismatic players in the history of the game, and credited for helping revive the popularity of tennis during the 1990s.   In singles tennis, Agassi is an eight-time Grand Slam (tennis)|Grand Slam champion who competed in 15 Grand Slam finals, a Tennis at the 1996 Summer Olympics|1996 Olympic gold medalist, and the winner of the 1990 ATP Tour World Championships. He is one of four male singles players to have achieved a Grand Slam  Grand Slam|Career Grand Slam (all four Grand Slam championships) in the History of  Era and one of seven in history, the first of two to have achieved a Career Golden Slam (Career Grand Slam and Olympic gold medal), and the only man to have won the Career Golden Slam and the ATP Tour World Championships: a distinction dubbed as a "Career Super Slam" by "Sports Illustrated".  Agassi was the first male player to win all four Grand Slams on three different surfaces (hard, clay and grass), and the last American male to win the French Open (1999) and the Australian Open (2003). He also won 17 ATP World Tour Masters 1000|ATP Masters Series titles, and was part of a winning Davis Cup team in 1990 Davis Cup|1990 and 1992 Davis Cup|1992.  After suffering from sciatica caused by two bulging discs in his back, a   displacement) and a bone spur that interfered with the nerve, Agassi retired from professional tennis on September 3, 2006, after losing in the third round of the US Open (tennis)|US Open. He is the founder of the Andre Agassi Charitable Foundation, which has raised over $60 million for at-risk children in Southern Nevada. In 2001, the Foundation opened the Andre Agassi College Preparatory Academy in Las Vegas, a K-12 public charter school for at-risk children. ==1970–1985: Early life== Agassi was born in Las Vegas, Nevada, to Emmanuel  "Mike" Aghassian and Elizabeth "Betty" Agassi (née Dudley).  His father, a former Olympic boxer for Iran, is of Armenian and Assyrian descent and changed the family name to Agassi after his migration to the United States.    Andre Agassi's mother, Betty, is a breast cancer survivor. He has three older siblings – Rita, Philip and Tami. Mike Agassi reportedly banged on the fences with a hammer during Andre's matches when his son lost a point, screamed at officials and was ejected more than once. In a passage from the book "Open", Agassi details how his father made him play a match for money with football legend Jim Brown, in 1979, when Agassi was just 9 years old. Brown was at a Vegas tennis club complaining to the owner about a money match that was canceled. Agassi's father stepped in and told Brown that he could play his son and he would put up his house for the wager. Brown countered with a $10,000 bet; but after being warned by the club owner not to take the bet because he would lose and be embarrassed, Brown and Mike Agassi agreed that they'd set the amount after he and Andre played two sets. Brown lost those sets, 3–6, 3–6, declined the 10K wager, and offered to play the third for $500, which he lost 2–6.  At age 13, Andre was sent to Nick Bollettieri's Tennis Academy in Florida.  He was meant to stay for only 3 months because that was all his father could afford. After thirty minutes of watching Agassi play, Bollettieri called Mike and said: "Take your cheque back. He's here for free", claiming that Agassi had more natural talent than anyone else he had seen.  Agassi dropped out of school in the ninth grade.  tennis career biography==  He turned professional at the age of 16 and competed in his first tournament at La Quinta, California. He won his first match against John Austin (tennis)|John Austin 6–4, 6–2, but then lost his second match to Mats Wilander 1–6, 1–6. By the end of the year, Agassi was ranked world no. 91.  Agassi won his first top-level singles title in 1987 at the ATP Itaparica|Sul American Open in Itaparica.   He ended the year ranked world no. 25.   He won six additional tournaments in 1988 (Memphis, 1988 U.S. Men's Clay Court  Men's Clay Court Championships, World Championship Tennis#WCT 1988|Forest Hills WCT, Stuttgart Outdoor, 1988 Volvo  International and 1988 Livingston  Open),   and, by December of that year, he had surpassed US$1 million in career prize money after playing in just 43  fastest anyone in history had reached that level.  Andre Agassi – Biography <!-- Bot generated title  ] During the year, he set the open-era record for most consecutive victories by a male teenager, a record that would stand for 17 years until being broken by Rafael Nadal in 2005. His year-end ranking was world no. 3, behind second-ranked Ivan Lendl and top-ranked Mats Wilander. Both the Association of Tennis Professionals and "Tennis" magazine named Agassi the Most Improved Player of the Year for 1988.   In addition to not playing the Australian Open (which would later become his best Grand Slam event) for the first eight years of his career, Agassi chose not to play at The Championships,  from 1988 through 1990 and publicly stated that he did not wish to play there because of the event's  particularly its "predominantly white" dress code to which players at the event are required to conform. Strong performances on the tour meant that Agassi was quickly tipped as a future Grand Slam champion. While still a teenager, he reached the semifinals of both the French Open and the US Open (tennis)|US Open in 1988, and made the US Open semifinals in 1989. He began the 1990s, however, with a series of near-misses. He reached his first Grand Slam final in 1990 at the French Open, where he was favored before losing in four sets to Andrés Gómez. He reached his second Grand Slam final of the year at the US Open, defeating defending champion Boris Becker in the semifinals. His opponent in the final was Pete Sampras; a year earlier, Agassi had beaten Sampras 6–2, 6–1, after which he told his coach that he felt bad for Sampras because he was never going to make it as a pro. Agassi lost the US Open final to Sampras 4–6, 3–6, 2–6.   The rivalry between these two American players became the dominant rivalry in tennis over the rest of the decade. Also in 1990, Agassi helped the United States win its first Davis Cup in 8 years and won his only Tennis Masters Cup, beating reigning Wimbledon champion Stefan Edberg in the final. In 1991, Agassi reached his second consecutive French Open final, where he faced fellow Bollettieri Academy alumnus Jim Courier. Courier emerged the victor in a five set final. Agassi decided to play at Wimbledon in 1991, leading to weeks of speculation in the media about the clothes he would wear. He eventually emerged for the first round in a completely white outfit. He went on to reach the quarterfinals on that occasion, losing in five sets to David Wheaton. Agassi's Grand Slam tournament breakthrough came at Wimbledon, not at the French Open or the US Open, where he had previously enjoyed success. In 1992, he defeated Goran Ivanišević in a five-set final.   Along the way, Agassi overcame two former Wimbledon champions, Boris Becker and John McEnroe. No other baseliner would triumph at Wimbledon until Lleyton Hewitt ten years later. Agassi was named the BBC Sports Personality of the Year Overseas  Overseas Sports Personality of the Year in 1992. Agassi once again played on the United States' Davis Cup winning team in 1992. It was their second Davis cup title in three years. 1993 saw Agassi win the only doubles title of his career, at the Cincinnati Masters, partnered with Petr Korda. Agassi missed much of the early part of that year with injuries. Although he made the quarterfinals in his Wimbledon title defense, he lost to eventual champion and world no. 1 Pete Sampras in five sets. Agassi lost in the first round at the US Open to Thomas Enqvist and required wrist surgery late in the year.  With new coach Brad Gilbert on board, Agassi began to employ more of a tactical, consistent approach, which fueled his resurgence. Agassi started slowly in 1994, losing in the first week at the French Open and Wimbledon. Nevertheless, Agassi emerged during the hard-court season, winning the Canada  Open. His comeback culminated at the 1994 US Open (tennis)|1994 US Open with a five-set fourth-round victory against compatriot Michael Chang, and then becoming the first man to capture the US Open as an Seed  player, beating Michael Stich in the final.   In 1995, Agassi shaved his balding head, breaking with his old "image is everything" style. He competed in the 1995 Australian Open (his first appearance at the event) and won, beating Sampras in a four-set final.   Agassi and Sampras met in five tournament finals in 1995, all on hardcourt, with Agassi winning three. Agassi won three Masters Series events in 1995 (Cincinnati  Miami Masters|Key Biscayne, and the Canadian Open) and seven titles total.   He compiled a career-best 26-match winning streak during the summer hard-court circuit, which ended when he lost the 1995 US Open (tennis)|US Open final to Sampras. Agassi reached the List of ATP number 1 ranked players|world no. 1 ranking for the first time in April 1995. He held that ranking until November, for a total of 30 weeks. In terms of win/loss record, 1995 was Agassi's best year. He won 73 matches and lost only 9. Agassi was also once again a key player on the United States' Davis Cup winning team—the third and final Davis Cup title of Agassi's career. 1996 was a less successful year for Agassi, as he failed to reach any Grand Slam final. He suffered two early-round losses at the hands of compatriots Chris Woodruff and Doug Flach at the French Open and Wimbledon, respectively, and lost to Chang in straight sets in the Australian and US Open semifinals. At the time, Agassi blamed the Australian Open loss on the windy conditions, but later said in his biography that he had lost the match on purpose, as he did not want to play Boris Becker, whom he would have faced in that final. The high point for Agassi was winning the men's singles gold medal at the 1996 Summer  Games in Atlanta, beating Sergi Bruguera of Spain in the final, 6–2, 6–3, 6–1.   Agassi also successfully defended his singles titles in Cincinnati and Key Biscayne. 1997 was the low point of Agassi's career. His wrist injury resurfaced, and he played only 24 matches during the year. He would later confess that he started using   at that time, allegedly on the urging of a friend.  He failed an ATP drug test, but wrote a letter claiming the same friend had spiked a drink. The ATP dropped the failed drug test as a warning. In his autobiography, Agassi admitted that the letter was a lie. He quit the drug soon after. He won no top-level titles and his ranking sank to world no. 141 on November 10, 1997, prompting many to believe that his run as one of the sport's premier competitors was over and that he would never again win any significant championships.     serving In 1998, Agassi began a rigorous conditioning program and worked his way back up the rankings by playing in Challenger Series tournaments, a circuit for pro players ranked outside the wor
Arithmetic mean	{"City":null,"Organization":null,"Country":["United States"],"Company":null,"Person":["Darrell Huff","Victor Gollancz"],"State":null}	In mathematics and statistics, the arithmetic mean , or simply the mean or average when the context is clear, is the central tendency of a collection of numbers taken as the sum of the numbers divided by the size of the collection. The collection is often the sample space of an Experiment (probability  The term "arithmetic mean" is preferred in mathematics and statistics because it helps distinguish it from other average|means such as the geometric mean|geometric and harmonic mean. In addition to mathematics and statistics, the arithmetic mean is used frequently in fields such as economics, sociology, and history, though it is used in almost every academic field to some extent. For example, per capita GDP gives an approximation of the arithmetic average income of a nation's population. While the arithmetic mean is often used to report central  tendencies, it is not a robust statistic, meaning that it is greatly influenced by outliers. Notably, for skewed distributions, the arithmetic mean may not accord with one's notion of "middle", and robust statistics such as the median may be a better description of central tendency. ==Definition== Suppose we have sample space    . Then the arithmetic mean  A  is defined via the equation :   a_i  . If the list is a statistical population, then the mean of that population is called a population mean . If the list is a sampling  sample, we call the resulting statistic a sample mean . The arithmetic mean of a variable is often denoted by a bar, for example  \bar{x}  (read "x bar") would be the mean of some sample space  X  . ==Motivating properties== The arithmetic mean has several properties that make it useful, especially as a measure of central tendency. These include: *If numbers  x_1,\ldots,x_n  have mean X, then  (x_1-X) + \ldots + (x_n-X) = 0  . Since  x_i-X  is the distance from a given number to the mean, one way to interpret this property is as saying that the numbers to the left of the mean are balanced by the numbers to the right of the mean. The mean is the only single number for which the residuals defined this way sum to zero. *If it is required to use a single number "X" as an estimate for the value of numbers  x_1,\ldots,x_n  , then the arithmetic mean does this best, in the sense of minimizing the sum of squares ("x"  "i"  &minus; "X")  2  of the errors and residuals in  (It follows that the mean is also the best single predictor in the sense of having the lowest root mean squared error.) *For a normal distribution, the arithmetic mean is equal to both the median and the mode, other measures of central tendency. ==Problems==  mean median  of mean, median and mode  of two log-normal distributions with different skewness. The arithmetic mean may be misinterpreted as the median to imply that most values are higher or lower than is actually the case. If elements in the sample space arithmetic   when placed in some order, then the median and arithmetic average are equal. For example, consider the sample space {1,2,3,4}. The average is 2.5, as is the median. However, when we consider a sample space that cannot be arranged into an arithmetic progression, such as {1,2,4,8,16}, the median and arithmetic average can differ significantly. In this case the arithmetic average is 6.2 and the median is 4. When one looks at the arithmetic average of a sample space, one must note that the average value can vary significantly from most values in the sample space. There are applications of this phenomenon in many fields. For example, since the 1980s in the United States median income has increased more slowly than the arithmetic average of income. Researchers dealing with frequency data must also be careful when reporting summary statistics such as means or median. Where a phenomenon is rare in general (for example, emergency room visits among the general population), but occurs frequently in some people (for example, dare devils), then the mean value may be much lower than the median. ==Angles== Particular care must be taken when using cyclic data such as phases or angles. Naïvely taking the arithmetic mean of 1° and 359° yields a result of 180°. This is incorrect for two reasons: *Firstly, angle measurements are only defined up to a factor of Degree (angle)|360° (or 2π, if measuring in radians). Thus one could as easily call these 1° and &minus;1°, or 1° and 719° – each of which gives a different average. *Secondly, in this situation, 0° (equivalently, 360°) is geometrically a better "average" value: there is lower statistical  about it (the points are both 1° from it, and 179° from 180°, the putative average). In general application such an oversight will lead to the average value artificially moving towards the middle of the numerical range. A solution to this problem is to use the optimization formulation (viz, define the mean as the central point: the point about which one has the lowest dispersion), and redefine the difference as a modular distance (i.e., the distance on the circle: so the modular distance between 1° and 359° is 2°, not 358°). ==See also== *Assumed mean *Average *Central tendency  estimator *Consensus forecasts *Empirical measure *Fieller's theorem *Fréchet mean *Generalized mean *Geometric mean *Harmonic mean *Inequality of arithmetic and geometric means *Ky Fan inequality *Mean *Median *mode  *Muirhead's inequality *Sample mean and covariance *Sample size *Standard deviation *Summary statistics *Variance ==Further reading== *Darrell Huff, "How to lie with statistics", Victor Gollancz, 1954 (ISBN  ==References== ==External links==  Calculations and comparisons between arithmetic and geometric mean of two numbers] * Category:Means <!-- interwiki  ar:متوسط حسابي az:Ədədi orta   ca:Mitjana aritmètica  průměr  Mittel  keskmine es:Media aritmética eo:Aritmetika meznombro  aritmetiko sinple  حسابی fr:Moyenne arithmétique gl:Media aritmética ko:산술 평균    sredina it:Promedio  орта шама lt:Aritmetinis vidurkis hu:Számtani közép ms:Min aritmetik nl:Rekenkundig gemiddelde  nn:Aritmetisk middeltal  pms:Media aritmética pl:Średnia arytmetyczna pt:Média aritmética ro:Medie aritmetică    priemer  sredina  sredina  sredina su:Arithmetic mean  keskiarvo sv:Aritmetiskt medelvärde  tr:Aritmetik ortalama   ur:نمونہ اوسط vi:Trung bình cộng 
Alaska	{"City":["Alburgh","Anchorage","Barrow","Cordova","Hyder","Largest City","Northwest Arctic Borough","Point Roberts","Valdez","largest city"],"Organization":["Bureau of Land Management","United States Bureau","United States Fish and Wildlife Service","University of Alaska","federal government"],"Country":["Canada","Japan","Russia","United States"],"Company":["Doyon Limited"],"Person":["Augustine Volcano Jan","Denali Mt  McKinley","William Sound"],"State":["Alaska","British Columbia","California","Hawaii","Minnesota","Montana","Northwest Arctic Borough","Texas","Vermont","Washington","Yukon Territory"]}	Alaska () is the List of U.S. states and territories by area|largest state in the United States by area. It is situated in the northwest extremity of the North America|North American continent, with Canada to the east, the Arctic Ocean to the north, and the Pacific Ocean to the west and south, with Russia further west across the Bering Strait. Alaska is the List of U.S. states and territories by population|4th least populous and the List of U.S. states and territories by population density|least densely populated of the 50 United States. Approximately half of Alaska's 722,718  residents live within the Anchorage metropolitan area. Alaska was Alaska  from Russia on March 30, 1867, for $7.2 million ($}} in today's dollars) at approximately two cents per acre ($4.74/km²). The land went through several administrative changes before becoming an Territories of the United  (or incorporated) territory on May 11, 1912, and the 49th state of the U.S. on January 3, 1959. The name "Alaska" (Аляска) was already introduced in the Russian colonial period, when it was used only for the Alaska  and is derived from the Aleut language|Aleut "alaxsxaq", meaning "the mainland" or, more literally, "the object towards which the action of the sea is directed". Ransom, J. Ellis. 1940. "Derivation of the Word "Alaska"'. American Anthropologist n.s., 42: pp. 550–551 It is also known as Alyeska, the "great land", an Aleut word derived from the same root. ==Geography== Alaska has a longer coastline than all the other U.S. states combined. It is the only non-contiguous U.S. state on continental North America; about of British Columbia (Canada) separates Alaska from Washington  state. Alaska is thus an exclave of the United States. It is technically part of the Continental United  U.S., but is often not included in colloquial use; Alaska is not part of the contiguous U.S., often called Outside (Alaska)|"the Lower 48". The other three exclaves of the United States are the Northwest Angle of Minnesota, Point Roberts, Washington and Alburgh, Vermont. The capital city, Juneau, is situated on the mainland of the North American continent, but is not connected by road to the rest of the North American highway system. The state is bordered by the Yukon Territory and British Columbia in Canada, to the east, the Gulf of Alaska and the Pacific Ocean to the south, the Bering Sea, Bering Strait, and Chukchi Sea to the west and the Arctic Ocean to the north. Alaska's territorial waters touch Russia's territorial waters in the Bering Strait, as the Russian Big Diomede Island and Alaskan Little Diomede Island are only apart. With the extension of the Aleutian Islands into the eastern hemisphere, it is technically both the westernmost and easternmost state in the United States, as well as also being the northernmost. File:Alaska area compared to conterminous  size compared with the contiguous United States|48 contiguous states. Alaska is the largest state in the United States in land area at , over twice the size of Texas, the next largest state. Alaska is larger than all but 18 sovereign countries. Counting territorial waters, Alaska is larger than the combined area of the next three largest states: Texas, California, and Montana. It is also larger than the combined area of the 22 smallest U.S. states. ===Regions=== There are no officially defined borders demarcating the various regions of Alaska, but there are six widely accepted regions: ====South Central==== The most populous region of Alaska, containing Anchorage, the  Valley and the Kenai Peninsula. Rural, mostly unpopulated areas south of the Alaska Range and west of the Wrangell Mountains also fall within the definition of Southcentral, as well as the Prince William Sound area and the communities of Cordova, Alaska|Cordova and Valdez, Alaska|Valdez.  Also referred to as the Panhandle or Inside Passage, this is the region of Alaska closest to the rest of the United States. As such, this was where most of the initial non-indigenous settlement occurred in the years following the Alaska Purchase. The region is dominated by the Alexander Archipelago as well as the Tongass National Forest, the largest national forest in the United States. It contains the state capital, Juneau, the former capital, Sitka, and Ketchikan, at one time Alaska's largest city.  SitNews, "1927: When Ketchikan was the Largest City in Alaska"] The Alaska Marine Highway provides a vital surface transportation link throughout the area, as only three communities (Haines, Alaska|Haines, Hyder, Alaska|Hyder and Skagway,  enjoy direct connections to the contiguous North American road system.  File:Denali Mt  McKinley is both the highest peak in Alaska and in all of North America. The largest region of Alaska, much of it uninhabited wilderness. Fairbanks is the only community of any significant size. Small towns and Native villages are scattered throughout, mostly along the highway and river systems. Denali National Park and Preserve is located here, home to Mount McKinley (also widely known by its local name of Denali), the highest point in North America.  File:Grizzly Bear Fishing Brooks  bear fishing for salmon at Katmai National Park and  Falls. A sparsely inhabited region stretching some inland from the Bering Sea. Most of the population lives along the coast. Kodiak Island is also located in Southwest. The massive  Delta, one of the largest river deltas in the world, is here. Portions of the Alaska Peninsula are considered part of Southwest, with the remaining portions included with the Aleutian Islands (see below). ====North Slope==== The North Slope is mostly tundra peppered with small villages. The area is known for its massive reserves of crude oil, and contains both the National Petroleum  and the Prudhoe Bay Oil Field. Barrow, Alaska|Barrow, the northernmost city in the United States, is located here. The Northwest Arctic Borough,  Arctic area, anchored by Kotzebue,  and also containing the Kobuk River valley, is often regarded as being part of this region. However, the respective Inupiat people|Inupiat of the North Slope and of the Northwest Arctic seldom think of themselves as one. ====Aleutian Islands==== More than 300 small, volcanic islands make up this chain, which stretches over into the Pacific Ocean. The International Date Line was drawn west of 180° to keep the whole state, and thus the entire North American continent, within the same legal day. However, because some of these islands fall in the Eastern Hemisphere, this makes Alaska the northernmost, easternmost and westernmost state in the union, with the southernmost state being Hawaii. Two of the islands, Attu Island|Attu and Kiska, were occupied by Japanese forces during World War II. ===Natural features=== File:Augustine Volcano Jan 12 2006  Volcano erupting on January 12, 2006. With its myriad islands, Alaska has nearly of tidal shoreline. The Aleutian Islands chain extends west from the southern tip of the Alaska Peninsula. Many active volcanoes are found in the Aleutians and in coastal regions. Unimak Island, for example, is home to Mount Shishaldin, which is an occasionally smoldering volcano that rises to above the North Pacific. It is the most perfect volcanic cone on Earth, even more symmetrical than Japan's Mount Fuji. The chain of volcanoes extends to Mount Spurr, west of Anchorage on the mainland. Geologists have identified Alaska as part of Wrangellia, a large region consisting of multiple states and Canadian provinces in the Pacific Northwest which is actively undergoing plate  building. One of the world's largest tides occurs in Turnagain Arm, just south of Anchorage – tidal differences can be more than . (Many sources say Turnagain has the  tides in North America, but several areas in Canada have larger tides.) Alaska has more than three million lakes. Marshlands and wetland permafrost cover (mostly in northern, western and southwest flatlands). Glacier ice covers some of land and of tidal zone. The Bering Glacier complex near the southeastern border with Yukon covers alone. With over 100,000, Alaska has half of the world's glaciers. ===Land ownership===  has more public land owned by the federal government than any other state. According to an October 1998 report by the United States Bureau of Land Management, approximately 65% of Alaska is owned and managed by the Federal government of the United States|U.S. federal government as public lands, including a multitude of United States National  forests, national parks, and national wildlife refuges. Of these, the Bureau of Land Management manages , or 23.8% of the state. The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge is managed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service. It is the world's largest wildlife refuge, comprising . Of the remaining land area, the state of Alaska owns ; its entitlement under the Alaska Statehood Act. A portion of that acreage is occasionally ceded to organized boroughs, under the statutory provisions pertaining to newly formed boroughs. Smaller portions are set aside for rural subdivisions and other  opportunities, though these are infrequently popular due to the often remote and roadless locations. The University of Alaska, as a land grant university, also owns substantial acreage which it manages independently. Another are owned by 12 regional, and scores of local, Native corporations created under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act. Alaska Native Regional  Native corporation Doyon, Limited often promotes itself as the largest private landowner in Alaska in advertisements and other  Provisions of ANCSA allowing the corporations' land holdings to be sold on the open market starting in 1991 were repealed before they could take effect. Effectively, the corporations hold title (including subsurface title in many cases, a privilege denied to individual Alaskans) but cannot sell the land. Alaska Native Allotment Act|Individual Native allotments can be and are sold on the open market, however. Various private interests own the remaining land, totaling about one percent of the state. Alaska is, by a large margin, the state with the smallest percentage of private land ownership when Native corporation holdings are excluded. ===Climate=== The climate in Juneau and the southeast panhandle is a mid-latitude oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification "Cfb") in the southern sections and a subarctic oceanic climate (Köppen "Cfc") in the northern parts. On an annual basis, the panhandle is both the wettest and warmest part of Alaska with milder temperatures in the winter and high precipitation throughout the year. Juneau averages over of precipitation a year. This is also the only region in Alaska in which the average daytime high temperature is above freezing during the winter months. The climate of Anchorage and south central Alaska is mild by Alaskan standards due to the region's proximity to the seacoast. While the area gets less rain than southeast Alaska, it gets more snow, and days tend to be clearer. On average, Anchorage receives of precipitation a year, with around of snow, although there are areas in the south central which receive far more snow. It is a subarctic climate (Köppen "Dfc") due to its brief, cool summers. File:Barrow  Alaska|Barrow, known colloquially for many years by the nickname "Top of the World", is the northernmost city in the United States. The climate of Western Alaska is determined in large part by the Bering Sea and the Gulf of Alaska. It is a subarctic oceanic climate in the southwest and a continental subarctic climate farther north. The temperature is somewhat moderate considering how far north the area is. This region has a tremendous amount of variety in precipitation. An area stretching from the northern side of the Seward Peninsula to the Kobuk River valley is technically a desert, with portions receiving less than of precipitation annually. On the other extreme, some locations between Dilli
Aldous Huxley	{"City":["Berlin","Gaza","Godalming","London","Los Angeles","New York","Oxford","Surrey","Taos"],"Organization":["Air Ministry","Balliol College","Eton College","Occidental College","Oxford|Balliol College","Prior's Field School"],"Country":["Italy","United Kingdom","United States"],"Company":["Bloomsbury Group","Caterpillar","Greenwood Press","LSD","New York Times","Oxford Poetry","Sterling Publishing Company Inc.","Walt Disney"],"Person":["Aldous Huxley","Alfred Matthew Hubbard","Andrew Huxley","Anita Loos","Arnold Family Tree","Bertrand Russell","Charles Mason","Christopher Isherwood","Clive Bell","David King","Dick Huemer","Duncan Grant","Eric Blair","F. Matthias Alexander","George Cukor","George Orwell","Gerald Heard","Greta Garbo","H. Lawrence","Humphrey Ward","Humphry Osmond","J. Krishnamurti","John Grant","Julia Arnold","Julian Huxley","Leonard Huxley","Leonard Huxley  Huxley","Lytton Strachey","Maria Nys","Marshall Cavendish","Mary Augusta Ward","Matthew Arnold","Noel Trevelyan","Ottoline Morrell","Ray Bradbury","Remsen Bird","Sam Weller","Stephen Runciman","Swami Prabhavanada","Thomas Henry Huxley","Vanessa Bell"],"State":["New Mexico","Southern California"]}	Aldous Leonard Huxley (26 July 1894 – 22 November 1963) was an English writer and one of the most prominent members of the famous Huxley family. Best known for his novels including "Brave New World" and a wide-ranging output of essays, Huxley also edited the magazine "Oxford Poetry", and published short stories, poetry, travel writing, film stories and scripts. Huxley spent the later part of his life in the United States, living in Los Angeles from 1937 until his death. Aldous Huxley was a  pacifist, and  and he was latterly interested in spiritual subjects such as parapsychology and philosophical mysticism. David King Dunaway (1998)  Aldous Huxley recollected: an oral history] p.90. Rowman Altamira, 1998 He is also well known for advocating and taking Psychedelic  By the end of his life Huxley was widely recognized to be one of the pre-eminent intellectuals of his time and respected as an important researcher into visual communication and sight-related theories as well. == Early life == Aldous Huxley was born in Godalming, Surrey, UK, in 1894. He was the third son of the writer and schoolmaster Leonard Huxley  Huxley and his first wife, Julia Arnold, who founded Prior's Field School. Julia was the niece of poet and critic Matthew Arnold and the sister of Mary Augusta Ward|Mrs. Humphrey Ward. Aldous was the grandson of Thomas Henry Huxley, the zoologist, agnostic and  ("Darwin's Bulldog"). His brother Julian Huxley and half-brother Andrew Huxley also became outstanding biologists. Aldous had another brother, Noel Trevelyan (1891–1914), who committed suicide after a period of Major depressive  depression. Holmes, Charles Mason (1978) "Aldous Huxley and the Way to Reality." Greenwood Press, 1978, p. 5 Huxley began his learning in his father's well-equipped botanical laboratory, then continued in a school named Hillside. His teacher was his mother, who supervised him for several years until she became terminally ill. After Hillside, he was educated at Eton College. Huxley's mother died in 1908 when he was 14. In 1911, he suffered an illness  punctata) which "left [him] practically blind for two to three years". Aldous' near-blindness disqualified him from service in the First World War. Once his eyesight recovered sufficiently, he was able to study English literature at Balliol College, Oxford|Balliol College, Oxford. In 1916 he edited "Oxford Poetry" and later graduated (B.A.) with first class honours. His brother Julian wrote,  I believe his blindness was a blessing in disguise. For one thing, it put paid to his idea of taking up medicine as a career ... His uniqueness lay in his universalism. He was able to take all knowledge for his province. Julian Huxley 1965. "Aldous Huxley 1894–1963: a Memorial Volume". Chatto & Windus, London. p. 22  Following his education at Balliol, Huxley was financially indebted to his father and had to earn a living. He taught French for a year at Eton College|Eton, where Eric Blair (later to become George Orwell) and Stephen Runciman were among his pupils, but was remembered as an incompetent and hopeless teacher who couldn’t keep discipline. Nevertheless, Blair and others were impressed by his use of words.  For a short while in 1918, he was employed acquiring provisions at the Air Ministry. Significantly, Huxley also worked for a time in the 1920s at the  advanced Brunner Mond|Brunner and Mond chemical plant in Billingham, Teesside, and the most recent introduction to his famous science fiction novel "Brave New World" (1932) states that this experience of "an ordered universe in a world of planless incoherence" was one source for the novel. Baggini, Julian (2009)  Atheism, A Brief insight]" Sterling Publishing Company, Inc., 2009 <div  {| align="center"  margin:0em; border:1px solid #E9E9E9" !  font-size:95%; border:1px solid #aaaaaa; padding: 0 5px 0 5px;" | Huxley-Arnold Family Tree (partial) |- |  | |}  ==Career== Huxley completed his first (unpublished) novel at the age of 17 and began writing seriously in his early 20s. His first published novels were social satires, beginning with "Crome Yellow" (1921). === Bloomsbury set ===  to right: Bloomsbury Group members – Lady Ottoline Morrell, Maria Nys, Lytton Strachey, Duncan Grant, and Vanessa Bell. During the First World War, Huxley spent much of his time at Garsington Manor, home of Lady Ottoline Morrell, working as a farm labourer. Here he met several Bloomsbury  figures including Bertrand Russell and Clive Bell. Later, in "Crome Yellow" (1921) he caricatured the Garsington lifestyle. In 1919 he married Maria Nys, a Belgian woman he met at Garsington; they had one son. The family lived in Italy part of the time in the 1920s, where Huxley would visit his friend D. H. Lawrence. Following Lawrence's death in 1930, Huxley edited Lawrence's letters (1933). Works of this period included important novels on the dehumanising aspects of scientific progress, most famously "Brave New World", and on pacifist themes (for example, "Eyeless in Gaza"). In "Brave New World" Huxley portrays a society operating on the principles of mass production and Pavlovian conditioning. Huxley was strongly influenced by F.M. Alexander|F. Matthias Alexander and included him as a character in "Eyeless in Gaza". Starting from this period, Huxley began to write and edit non-fiction works on pacifist issues, including "Ends and Means", "An Encyclopedia of Pacifism", and "Pacifism and Philosophy", and was an active member of the Peace Pledge Union. === The U.S. === In 1937, Huxley moved to Hollywood, with his wife Maria, son Matthew, and friend Gerald Heard. He lived in the U.S., mainly in southern California, until his death, but also for a time in Taos, New Mexico, where he wrote "Ends and Means" (published in 1937). In this work he examines the fact that although most people in modern civilisation agree that they want a world of "liberty, peace, justice, and brotherly love", they have not been able to agree on how to achieve it. Heard introduced Huxley to Vedanta  philosophy), meditation, and vegetarianism through the principle of ahimsa. In 1938 Huxley befriended J. Krishnamurti, whose teachings he greatly admired. He also became a Vedantist in the circle of Hindu Swami Swami  and introduced Christopher Isherwood to this circle. Not long after, Huxley wrote his book on widely held spiritual values and ideas, "The Perennial Philosophy", which discussed the teachings of renowned mystics of the world. Huxley's book affirmed a sensibility that insists there are realities beyond the generally accepted "five senses" and that there is genuine meaning for humans beyond both sensual satisfactions and  Huxley became a close friend of Remsen Bird, president of Occidental College. He spent much time at the college, which is in the Eagle Rock, Los Angeles|Eagle Rock neighbourhood of Los Angeles. The college appears as "Tarzana College" in his satirical novel "After Many a Summer" (1939). The novel won Huxley that year's James Tait Black Memorial Prize for fiction. Haugrud Reiff, Raychel (2003) "Aldous Huxley: Brave New World" p.103. Marshall Cavendish, 2009 Huxley also incorporated Bird into the novel. During this period Huxley earned some Hollywood income as a writer. In March 1938, his friend Anita Loos, a novelist and screenwriter, put him in touch with  who hired Huxley for "Madame Curie (1943 film)|Madame Curie" which was originally to star Greta Garbo and be directed by George Cukor. (The film was eventually completed by MGM in 1943 with a different director and cast.) Huxley received screen credit for "Pride and Prejudice (1940 film)|Pride and Prejudice" (1940) and was paid for his work on a number of other films, including "Jane Eyre (1944 film)|Jane Eyre" (1944). However, his experience in Hollywood was not a success. When he wrote a synopsis of "Alice in Wonderland (1951 film)|Alice in Wonderland", Walt Disney rejected it on the grounds that "he could only understand every third word". name="The Huxleys p.  Huxley's leisurely development of ideas, it seemed, was not suitable for the movie moguls, who demanded fast, dynamic dialogue above all else. For Dick Huemer, during the 1940s, Huxley went to the first of a five meetings' session to elaborate the script of "Alice in Wonderland" but never came again. name="Mouse Under Glass  David Koenig, "Mouse Under Glass", p.82 For author John Grant, although the movie's character the Caterpillar displays some  familiar from Huxley's discussion of his experiments with hallucinogens, Huxley's contribution to the movie is nonexistent. name="Animated Characters  John Grant, "The Encyclopedia of Walt Disney's Animated Characters", p.233. On 21 October 1949, Huxley wrote to George Orwell, author of "Nineteen Eighty-Four", congratulating him on "how fine and how profoundly important the book is". In his letter to Orwell, he predicted:  Within the next generation I believe that the world's leaders will discover that infant conditioning and narco-hypnosis are more efficient, as instruments of government, than clubs and prisons, and that the lust for power can be just as completely satisfied by suggesting people into loving their servitude as by flogging them and kicking them into obedience.   === Post World War II === After the Second World War, Huxley applied for United States citizenship. His application was continuously deferred on the grounds that he would not say he would take up arms to defend the U.S. He claimed a philosophical, rather than a religious objection, and therefore was not exempt under the McCarran Act. He withdrew his application. Nevertheless, he remained in the country; and in 1959 he turned down an offer of a Knight Bachelor by the Harold  Minister  government. During the 1950s Huxley's interest in the field of psychical research grew keener, and his later works are strongly influenced by both mysticism and his experiences with psychedelic drugs. In October 1930, the English occultist Aleister Crowley dined with Huxley in Berlin, and to this day rumours persist that Crowley introduced Huxley to peyote on that occasion. He was introduced to mescaline (the key active ingredient of peyote) by the psychiatrist Humphry Osmond in 1953. Martin, Douglas. Friday, 22 August 2008 "Humphry Osmond, 86, Who Sought Medicinal Value in Psychedelic Drugs, Dies". New York: "New York Times" Through Dr. Osmond, Huxley met millionaire Alfred Matthew Hubbard who would deal with LSD on a wholesale basis. |year=1998  Press |quote=All sorts of crazy things started happening... }} On 24 December 1955, Huxley took his first dose of LSD. Indeed, Huxley was a pioneer of self-directed psychedelic drug use "in a search for  famously taking 100 micrograms of LSD as he lay dying. His psychedelic drug experiences are described in the essays "The Doors of Perception" (the title deriving from some lines in the book "The Marriage of Heaven and Hell" by William Blake), and "Heaven and Hell (essay)|Heaven and Hell". Some of his writings on psychedelics became frequent reading among early hippies. While living in Los Angeles, Huxley was a friend of Ray Bradbury. According to Sam Weller's biography of Bradbury, the latter was dissatisfied with Huxley, especially after Huxley encouraged Bradbury to take psychedelic drugs. == Association with Vedanta == Beginning in 1939 and continuing until his death in 1963, Huxley had an extensive association with the Vedanta Society of Southern California, founded and headed by Swami Prabhavananda. Together with Gerald Heard, Christopher Isherwood, and other followers he was initiated by the Swami and was taught meditation and spiritual practices. In 1944 Huxley wrote the introduction to the "Bhagavad Gita: The Song of God",   translated by Swami Prabhavanada and Christopher Isherwood, which was published by The Vedanta Society of Southern California. From 1941 through 1960 Huxley contributed 48 articles to "Vedanta and the West", published by the Society. He als
Apollo 11	{"City":["Cambridge","Houston","KSC","New York"],"Organization":["MIT","National Aeronautics and Space Administration","United States Congress","White House"],"Country":["Columbia","United States"],"Company":["Apollo Flight Computer Programming MIT Draper Laboratory"],"Person":["Bill Anders","Bill Pogue","Bruce McCandless II","Buzz Aldrin","Charles Moss Duke","Charlie Duke","Cliff Charlesworth","Don L. Lind","Donald K. Slayton","Gene Kranz","George M. Low","Harrison Schmitt","Jack Garman","Jack King","Jack Swigert","Jim Lovell","John F. Kennedy","Jules Verne","Julian Scheer","Ken Mattingly","Margaret H. Hamilton","Michael Collins  Collins","Neil  Michael Collins  Buzz","Neil Armstrong","Owen K. Garriott","Richard Nixon","Ronald Evans","Steve Bales","Susan B. Anthony","William Pogue"],"State":["Florida","Massachusetts","Texas"]}	 Mass  <!--See   <!--See  |callsign= CSM: Columbia. LM: Eagle in-flight; "Tranquility Base" on lunar surface  V SA-506  Space Center Launch Complex 39|LC 39A at KSC, Florida, USA <!--Place can be read by hover  |launch_date=, 13:32:00 UTC  20, 1969, 20:17:40 UTC at Mare  of Tranquility <!--Coords: See Mare  <br  First step: July 21, 02:56 UTC  h 36 m 40 s  h 36 m 21 s  |lunar_orbits=  h 30 m 25.79 s (30 orbits) |landing=July 24, 1969, 16:50:35 UTC. North Pacific Ocean,  d 03 h 18 m 35 s   astronauts in spacesuits without helmets sitting in front of a large photo of the moon.  to right: Neil  Michael Collins  Buzz Aldrin|Aldrin  Apollo 10  Apollo 12 }} Apollo 11 was an American spaceflight in which the astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin became the first <!-- men, humans, persons or other maybe  ever to land on the Moon on July 20, 1969, at 20:18 Coordinated Universal Time|UTC. Further, Neil Armstrong became the first to step onto the Moon 6 hours after the landing on 21 July, 02:56 UTC. A third member of the mission, Michael Collins  Collins, was waiting to pick them up in an orbit around the Moon. They all returned to Earth safely after travelling in space for 8 days. Launched by a Saturn V rocket from Kennedy Space Center in Merritt Island, Florida on July 16, Apollo 11 was the fifth manned mission of NASA's Apollo program. Two of these had flown around the Moon and one had prepared the Moon landing manoeuvres in orbit around the Earth. Apollo  spacecraft that was launched by the rocket had three parts: a Command Module#Command Module (CM)|Command Module with the three astronauts and their supplies in it, a Command Module#Service Module (SM)|Service Module with fuel and engines for changing course and a Apollo Lunar Module|Lunar landing Module. After being brought onto a course to the Moon by the launch rocket, they separated the spacecraft from it and travelled for three days until they entered into an orbit around the Moon. Here Armstrong and Aldrin moved to the Lunar Module and landed it on the Moon in the Mare  of Tranquility, a part of the Moon facing the Earth. The two astronauts stayed a total of about 21½ hours on the lunar surface, including about 2½ hours outside the spacecraft. After lifting off in the upper part of the Lunar Module and rejoining Collins in the Command Module, they returned to Earth and landed in the Pacific Ocean on July 24. Stepping down on the Moon, Armstrong described the event: "One small step for [a] man, one giant leap for mankind" which was heard by people world-wide as the landing was broadcasted on live TV. Apollo 11 effectively ended the Space Race and fulfilled late U.S. President John F. Kennedy's goal of reaching the Moon by the end of the 1960s, which he had expressed during a 1961 Apollo  statement before the United States Congress: "I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the Earth." ==Framework== ===Crew=== Each crewman of Apollo 11 had made a spaceflight before this mission, making it only the second all-veteran crew (the other being Apollo 10) in human spaceflight history. Collins was originally slated to be the Command Module Pilot (CMP) on Apollo 8 but was removed when he required surgery on his back and was replaced by Jim Lovell, his backup for that flight. After Collins was medically cleared, he took what would have been Lovell's spot on Apollo 11; as a veteran of Apollo 8, Lovell was transferred to Apollo 11's backup crew, but promoted to backup commander. ===Backup crew=== In early 1969, Bill Anders accepted a job with the National Space Council effective in August 1969 and announced his retirement as an astronaut. At that point Ken Mattingly was moved from the support crew into parallel training with Anders as backup Command Module Pilot in case Apollo 11 was delayed past its intended July launch (at which point Anders would be unavailable if needed) and would later join Lovell's crew and ultimately be assigned as the original Apollo 13 CMP. Donald K. Slayton, "Deke!" (New York: Forge, 1994), 237. ===Support crew=== *Charles Moss Duke, Jr.|Charlie Duke, Capsule  Communicator (CAPCOM) *Ronald Evans (CAPCOM) *Owen K. Garriott (CAPCOM) *Don L. Lind (CAPCOM) *Ken Mattingly (CAPCOM) *Bruce McCandless II (CAPCOM) *Harrison Schmitt (CAPCOM) *William Pogue|Bill Pogue *Jack Swigert ===Flight directors=== *Cliff Charlesworth (Green Team), launch and  activity|EVA *Gene Kranz (White Team), lunar landing *Glynn Lunney (Black Team), lunar ascent ===Call signs===  11 spacecraft. SM: Service Module (no call sign); CM: Command Module, Columbia; LM: Lunar Module, Eagle After the crew of Apollo 10 named their spacecraft "Charlie Brown" and "Snoopy", assistant manager for public affairs Julian Scheer wrote Manned Spacecraft Center director George M. Low to suggest the Apollo 11 crew be less flippant in naming their craft. During early mission planning, the names "Snowcone" and "Haystack" were used and put in the news release,  See, "e.g.", , p. 8. but the crew later decided to change them. The Apollo Command Module|command module was named "Columbia  after the "Columbiad#In  the giant cannon shell "spacecraft"  "launched" from Florida) by a giant cannon in Jules Verne|Jules Verne's 1865 novel "From the Earth to the Moon". The Apollo Lunar Module|lunar module was named "Eagle" for the national bird of the United States, the bald eagle, which is featured prominently on the mission insignia. Backup commander Jim Lovell recommended the name. ===Insignia=== File:Apollo 11  insignia The Apollo 11 mission insignia was designed by Collins, who wanted a symbol for "peaceful lunar landing by the United States." He chose an eagle as the symbol, put an olive branch in its beak, and drew a lunar background with the Earth in the distance. NASA officials said the talons of the eagle looked too "warlike" and after some discussion, the olive branch was moved to the claws. The crew decided the Roman numeral 11 (number)|XI would not be understood in some nations and went with "Apollo 11;" they decided not to put their names on the patch, so it would "be representative of "everyone" who had worked toward a lunar landing." All colors are natural, with blue and gold borders around the Mission patch|patch. The LM was named "Eagle" to match the insignia. When the Eisenhower  dollar coin was released a few years later, the patch design provided the eagle for its reverse side. The design was retained for the smaller Susan B. Anthony dollar which was unveiled in 1979, ten years after the Apollo 11 mission. ==Mission highlights== ===Launch and flight to lunar orbit=== In addition to throngs of people crowding highways and beaches near the launch site, millions watched the event on television, with NASA Chief of Public Information Jack King (NASA)|Jack King providing commentary. President Richard Nixon viewed the proceedings from the Oval Office of the White House. A Saturn V launched "Apollo 11" from Launch Pad 39A, part of the Launch Complex 39 site at the Kennedy Space Center on July 16, 1969 at 13:32:00 UTC (9:32:00 a.m. EDT local time). It entered orbit 12 minutes later. name="Orloff"  After one and a half orbits, the S-IVB third-stage engine pushed the spacecraft onto its trajectory toward the Moon with the Trans Lunar Injection burn at 16:22:13 UTC. About 30 minutes later the Apollo   module pair separated from this last remaining Saturn V stage and docked with the lunar module still nestled in the Apollo  Lunar Module Adapter (SLA)|Lunar Module Adaptor. After the lunar module was extracted, the combined spacecraft headed for the Moon, while the third stage booster flew on a trajectory past the Moon and into Heliocentric orbit|solar orbit. On July 19 at 17:21:50 UTC, "Apollo 11" passed behind the Moon and fired its service propulsion engine to enter lunar orbit. In the thirty orbits  Apollo-11] NASA. that followed, the crew saw passing views of their landing site in the southern Sea of Tranquility (Mare  about southwest of the crater Sabine D (0.67408N, 23.47297E). The landing site was selected in part because it had been characterized as relatively flat and smooth by the automated "Ranger 8" and "Surveyor 5" landers along with the "Lunar Orbiter" mapping spacecraft and unlikely to present major landing or  activity (EVA) challenges. ===Lunar descent=== File:Apollo 11  "Eagle" in lunar orbit after separating from "Columbia". On July 20, 1969 the Apollo Lunar Module|lunar module (LM) "Eagle" separated from the command module "Columbia". Collins, alone aboard "Columbia", inspected "Eagle" as it pirouetted before him to ensure the craft was not damaged. As the descent began, Armstrong and Aldrin found that they were passing landmarks on the surface 4 seconds early and reported that they were "long": they would land miles west of their target point. Five minutes into the descent burn, and above the surface of the Moon, the Apollo Guidance Computer|LM navigation and guidance computer distracted the crew with the first of several unexpected "1202" and "1201" program alarms. Inside Johnson Space Center|Mission Control Center in Houston, Texas, computer engineer Jack Garman told Flight  officer Steve Bales it was safe to continue the descent and this was relayed to the crew. The program alarms indicated "executive overflows", meaning the guidance computer could not complete all of its tasks in real time and had to postpone some of them. Michael Collins, in  Apollo Expeditions to the Moon], NASA pub. no. SP-350 (1975), chapter  11.4]. In a letter to Datamation, March 1, 1971, Margaret H. Hamilton, Director of Apollo Flight Computer Programming MIT Draper Laboratory, Cambridge, Massachusetts, stated: “Due to an error in the checklist manual, the rendezvous radar switch was placed in the wrong position. This caused it to send erroneous signals to the computer. The result was that the computer was being asked to perform all of its normal functions for landing while receiving an extra load of spurious data which used up 15% of its time. The computer (or rather the software in it) was smart enough to recognize that it was being asked to perform more tasks than it should be performing. It then sent out an alarm, which meant to the astronaut, “I'm overloaded with more tasks than I should be doing at this time and I'm going to keep only the more important tasks; i.e., the ones needed for landing.”... Actually, the computer was programmed to do more than recognize error conditions. A complete set of recovery programs was incorporated into the software. The software's action, in this case, was to eliminate lower priority tasks and re-establish the more important ones...If the computer hadn't recognized this problem and taken recovery action, I doubt if Apollo 11 would have been the successful moon landing it was”. Margaret H. Hamilton, Computer Got Loaded, Datamation, March 1, 1971. The Apollo onboard flight software for both the CM and LM was developed using an asynchronous executive so that higher priority jobs could interrupt lower priority jobs. The sequence that occurred in the Apollo 11 landing was successful because of its global error detection and recovery system. This included the restart capability to “kill and start over again” and recompute, and the display interface routines (“priority displays”) providing the ability, in the case of an emergency, to interrupt nominal displays with higher priority alarm displays. Steps previously taken to create solutions that took advantage of this  environment suggested solutions for  Although only one process is actively executing at a given time in a  environment, other processes in the same  or  in parallel with the executing process. With this as a backdrop, the priority display mechanisms were created, essentially changing the man-machine interface between the astronauts and the onb
Apollo 8	{"City":["Houston","New York City","Paris"],"Organization":["Apollo Command","Apollo Spacecraft Program Office","Earth Orbit mission","John F. Kennedy Space Center","Kennedy Space Center","Lunar Orbit mission","Marshall Space Flight Center","National Aeronautics and Space Administration","Soviet Union|Soviet Union","Spirit of St. Louis","Vehicle Assembly"],"Country":["United States"],"Company":["Grumman"],"Person":["Anne Morrow Lindbergh","Apollo  Module","Apollo Lunar Module|Lunar","Bill Bradley","Charles Lindbergh","Cliff Charlesworth","David Scott","Frank Borman","Fred Haise","George Low","Gerald P. Carr","James E. Webb","James McDivitt","Jim Lovell","Jim Lovell|James Lovell","John F. Kennedy","Ken Mattingly","Lunar Module Pilot William Anders","Michael Collins  Collins","Milton Windler","Rusty  Schweickart","William Anders"],"State":["California","Florida"]}	– The spacecraft mass at launch includes the CM and SM, but excludes the Launch Escape System (LES), which was discarded before reaching Earth orbit.  CM:  SM: |booster = Saturn V SA-503 |crew_size = 3 |launch_pad = Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39|LC 39A,  Florida, USA |launch_date = |landing = }}  North Pacific Ocean  |lunar_orbits = 10  = 20 h 10 m 13 s  = 6 d 03 h 00 m 42 s |crew_photo = Apollo 8 Crewmembers -  |crew_caption = Left to right: Lovell, Anders, Borman  =  Apollo 7 |next_mission =  Apollo 9 }} Apollo 8 , the second human  mission in the United States Apollo program|Apollo space program, was launched on December 21, 1968 and became the first human-crewed space craft to leave Earth orbit, reach the Earth's Moon, orbit it and return safely to Earth. The  crew — Commander Frank Borman, Command Module Pilot Jim Lovell|James Lovell, and Lunar Module Pilot William Anders — became the first humans to travel beyond low Earth orbit, the first to see Earth as a whole planet, and then the first to directly see the far side of the Moon. The 1968 mission, the first crewed launch of a Saturn V|Saturn V rocket, was also the first crewed launch from the John F. Kennedy Space Center, Florida, located adjacent to Cape Canaveral Air Force Station|Cape Canaveral. Originally planned as a second Apollo Lunar Module|Lunar Module/Apollo  Module|Command Module test in an elliptical medium Earth orbit in early 1969, the mission profile was changed in August 1968 to a more ambitious Command Module-only lunar orbital flight to be flown in December, because the Lunar Module was not yet ready to make its first flight. This meant Borman's crew was scheduled to fly two to three months sooner than originally planned, leaving them a shorter time for training and preparation, thus placing more demands than usual on their time and discipline. Apollo 8 took three days to travel to the Moon. It orbited ten times over the course of 20 hours, during which the crew made a Christmas Eve Apollo TV  broadcast in which they Apollo 8 Genesis reading|read the first 10 verses from the Book of Genesis. At the time, the broadcast was the most watched TV program ever. Apollo 8's successful mission paved the way for Apollo 11 to fulfill U.S. President John F. Kennedy's goal of landing a man on the Moon before the end of the 1960s. The Apollo 8 astronauts returned to Earth on December 27, 1968, when their space craft splashed down in the Northern Pacific Ocean. ==Crew== This crew was unique among pre-shuttle era missions in that the commander was not the most experienced member of the crew. This was also the first case of the rarity of an astronaut who had flown as commander subsequently flying as a non-commander, as Lovell had previously commanded Gemini XII. ===Backup crew=== On a lunar mission, the Command Module Pilot (CMP) was assigned the role of Celestial  while the Lunar Module Pilot (LMP) was assigned the role of flight engineer, responsible for monitoring all spacecraft systems, even if the flight didn't include a Lunar Module. name='baker1'  Lovell was originally the CMP on the back-up crew, with Michael Collins  Collins as the prime crew's CMP. However, Collins was replaced in July 1968, after suffering a intervertebral disc|cervical Spinal disc  herniation that required surgery to repair. Aldrin was originally the backup LMP. When Lovell was rotated to the prime crew, no one with experience on CSM 103 (the specific spacecraft used for the mission) was available, so Aldrin was moved to CMP and Fred Haise brought in as backup LMP. Armstrong went on to command Apollo 11, where Aldrin was returned to the LMP position, and Collins was assigned as CMP. ===Mission control=== The Earth-based mission control teams for Apollo 8 consisted of astronauts assigned to the support crew, as well as non-astronaut flight directors and their staffs. The support crew members were not trained to fly the mission, but were able to stand in for astronauts in meetings and be involved in the minutiae of mission planning, while the prime and backup crews trained. They also served as Capsule  during the mission. For Apollo 8, these crew members included astronauts John S. Bull, Vance D. Brand, Gerald P. Carr, and Ken Mattingly.  The mission control teams on Earth rotated in three shifts, each led by a flight director. The directors for Apollo 8 included Cliff Charlesworth (Green team), Glynn Lunney (Black team), and Milton Windler (Maroon team).  ===Mission insignia=== The triangular shape of the insignia symbolizes the shape of the Apollo command module. It shows a red figure 8 looping around the Earth and Moon representing the mission number as well as the circumlunar nature of the mission. On the red number 8 are the names of the three astronauts.  The initial design of the insignia was developed by Jim Lovell. Lovell reportedly sketched the initial design while riding in the backseat of a T-38 Talon|T-38 flight from California to Houston, shortly after learning of the re-designation of the flight to become a lunar orbital mission. The graphic design of the insignia was done by Houston artist and animator Bill Bradley.  ==Planning== Apollo 4 and Apollo 6 had been "A" missions, unmanned tests of the Saturn V launch vehicle using an unmanned Block I production model of the Apollo Command and Service Module in Earth Orbit. , scheduled for October 1968, would be a manned Earth Orbit flight of the CSM, completing the objectives for Mission "C".  CSM diagram Further missions depended on the readiness of the Apollo Lunar Module|Lunar Module (LM). Apollo 8 was planned as the "D" mission, to test the LM in a low Earth orbit in December 1968 by James McDivitt, David Scott and Rusty  Schweickart, while Borman's crew would fly the "E" mission, a more rigorous LM test in an elliptical medium Earth orbit as Apollo 9, in early 1969. But production of the LM fell behind schedule, and when Apollo 8's LM arrived at Cape Canaveral in June 1968, significant defects were discovered, leading Grumman, the lead contractor for the LM, to predict that the first mission-ready LM would not be ready until at least February 1969. This would mean delaying the "D" and subsequent missions, endangering the program's goal of a lunar landing before the end of 1969.    George Low, the Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, proposed a solution in August to keep the program on track despite the LM delay. Since the Apollo   Module (CSM) would be ready three months before the Lunar Module, a CSM-only mission could be flown in December 1968. Instead of just repeating the "C" mission flight of Apollo 7, this CSM could be sent all the way to the Moon, with the possibility of entering a lunar orbit. The new mission would also allow NASA to test lunar landing procedures that would otherwise have to wait until Apollo 10, the scheduled "F" mission.  This also meant that the medium Earth orbit "E" mission could be dispensed with. The net result was that only the "D" mission had to be delayed. Image:Apollo 8 first stage in the Vehicle Assembly  first stage of AS-503 being erected in the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) on February 1, 1968 Almost every senior manager at NASA agreed with this new mission, citing both confidence in the hardware and personnel, and the potential for a significant morale boost provided by a circumlunar flight. The only person who needed some convincing was James E. Webb, the NASA administrator. With the rest of his agency in support of the new mission, Webb eventually approved the mission change. The mission was officially changed from a "D" mission to a "C-Prime" Lunar Orbit mission, but was still referred to in press releases as an Earth Orbit mission at Webb's direction.  No public announcement was made about the change in mission until November 12, three weeks after Apollo 7's successful Earth orbit mission and less than 40 days before launch.  With the change in mission for Apollo 8, Director of Flight Crew Operations Deke Slayton decided to swap the crews of the D and E missions. This swap also meant a swap of spacecraft, requiring Borman's crew to use CSM-103, while McDivitt's crew would use CSM-104.    On September 9, the crew entered the Space flight  to begin their preparation for the flight. By the time the mission flew, the crew had spent seven hours training for every actual hour of flight. Although all crew members were trained in all aspects of the mission, it was necessary to specialize. Borman, as commander, was given training on controlling the spacecraft during the Atmospheric  Lovell was trained on Celestial  the spacecraft in case communication was lost with the Earth. Anders was placed in charge of checking that the spacecraft was in working order. name='baker1'  Added pressure on the Apollo program to make its 1969 landing goal was provided by the Soviet Union|Soviet Union's flight of some living creatures, including Russian tortoises, in a cislunar loop around the Moon on Zond 5 and return to Earth on September 21. There was speculation within NASA and the press that they might be preparing to launch  on a similar  mission before the end of 1968. name="Moon Race  The Apollo 8 crew, now living in the crew quarters at Kennedy Space Center, received a visit from Charles Lindbergh and his wife, Anne Morrow Lindbergh, the night before the launch.  They talked about how, before his Spirit of St. Louis|1927 flight, Lindbergh had used a piece of string to measure the distance from New York City to Paris on a globe and from that calculated the fuel needed for the flight. The total was a tenth of the amount that the Saturn V would burn every second.  The next day, the Lindberghs watched the launch of Apollo 8 from a nearby dune.   ==Saturn V==  Apollo 8 Saturn V being rolled out to Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39|Pad 39A The Saturn V rocket used by Apollo 8 was designated SA-503, or the "03rd" model of the Saturn V ("5") Rocket to be used in the Saturn-Apollo ("SA") program. When it was erected in the Vehicle Assembly  Assembly Building on December 20, 1967, it was thought that the rocket would be used for an unmanned Earth-orbit test flight carrying a Boilerplate   Module. Apollo 6 had suffered several major problems during its April 1968 flight, including severe pogo oscillation during its first stage, two second stage engine failures, and a third stage that failed to reignite in orbit. Without assurances that these problems had been rectified, NASA administrators could not justify risking a manned mission until additional unmanned test flights proved that the Saturn V was ready.   . Teams from the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) went to work on the problems. Of primary concern was the pogo oscillation, which would not only hamper engine performance, but could exert significant g-forces on a crew. A task force of contractors, NASA agency  and MSFC researchers concluded that the engines vibrated at a frequency similar to the frequency at which the spacecraft itself vibrated, causing a resonance effect that induced oscillations in the rocket. A system using helium gas to absorb some of these vibrations was installed. name='stages1'  Of equal importance was the failure of three engines during flight. Researchers quickly determined that a leaking hydrogen fuel line ruptured when exposed to vacuum, causing a loss of fuel pressure in engine two. When an automatic shutoff attempted to close the liquid hydrogen valve and shut down engine two, it accidentally shut down engine three's liquid oxygen due to a miswired connection. As a result, engine three failed within one second of engine two's shutdown. Further investigation revealed the same problem for the third-stage engine—a faulty igniter line. The team modified the igniter lines and fuel conduits, hoping to avoid similar problems on future launches. name='stages1'  The teams tested their solutions in August 1968 at the Marshall Space Flight Center
Astronaut	{"City":["Longman","Oxford","Tokyo","Warsaw"],"Organization":["Congress","Manned Maneuvering Unit","Massachusetts Institute of Technology","National Aeronautics and Space Administration","United States Army"],"Country":["Canada","China","Hungary","Ireland","Malaysia","Russian Federation","Saudi Arabia","Soviet Union","Taiwan","United Kingdom","United States","West Germany"],"Company":["Xinhua"],"Person":["Abdul Ahad Mohmand","Alan Shepard","Arnaldo Tamayo Méndez","Boris Yegorov","Brian Binnie","Bruce McCandless II","Byron K. Lichtenberg","Eugene Cernan","Franklin Chang-Diaz","Fred Haise","Gherman Titov","Helen Sharman","Ilan Ramon","Jack Swigert","Jerry L. Ross","Jim Lovell","Joe Walker","John Glenn","John Watts Young","John Young","Joseph A. Walker","Joseph Albert Walker","Konstantin Feoktistov","Lee Yih","Mae Jemison","Marc Garneau","Mark Shuttleworth","Mike Melvill","Neil Armstrong  Armstrong","Neil R. Jones","Norman Thagard","Patrick Baudry","Peggy A. Whitson","Peggy Whitson","Percy Greg","Rodolfo Neri Vela","Sally Ride","Sergei  K. Krikalev","Soviet Valentina Tereshkova","Soviet Yuri Gagarin","Sultan Salman al-Saud","Taylor Wang","Ulf Merbold","Valentina Tereshkova","Valentina Tereshkova  Vladimirovna","Valeri Polyakov","William Anders","Yang Liwei","Yuri Gagarin"],"State":["Massachusetts"]}	 Bruce McCandless II using a Manned Maneuvering Unit outside the United States Space Shuttle "Space Shuttle  in 1984. <!--*** DO NOT ADD "TAIKONAUT", "SPATIONAUT" ETC. TO INTRO SECTION - SEE TALK PAGE  An Astronaut or Cosmonaut is a person trained by a List of human spaceflight programs|human spaceflight program to command, pilot, or serve as a crew member of a spacecraft. While generally reserved for professional space travelers, the terms are sometimes applied to anyone who travels into space, including scientists, politicians, journalists, and tourists.   Until 2002, astronauts were sponsored and trained exclusively by governments, either by the military, or by civilian space agencies. With the sub-orbital flight of the privately funded Scaled Composites  in 2004, a new category of astronaut was created: the commercial astronaut. ==Definition== The criteria for what constitutes human human  vary. The Fédération Aéronautique Internationale (FAI) Sporting Code for astronautics recognizes only flights that exceed an Edge of space|altitude of .  FAI Sporting Code, Section 8, Paragraph 2.12.1] In the United States, professional, military, and commercial astronauts who travel above an altitude of  NASA – X-15 Space Pioneers Now Honored as Astronauts <!-- Bot generated title  ] are awarded Astronaut  wings. As of June 20, 2011, a total of 523 people from Timeline of space travel by nationality|38 countries Counting Anousheh Ansari as a representative of Iran. have reached or more in altitude, of which 520 reached low Earth orbit or beyond.   Of these, List of Apollo astronauts|24 people have traveled beyond Low Earth orbit, to either lunar or trans-lunar orbit or to the surface of the moon; three of the 24 did so twice: Jim Lovell, John Watts Young|John Young and Eugene Cernan.  The three astronauts who have not reached low Earth orbit are Joseph A. Walker|Joe Walker, Mike Melvill and Brian Binnie. Under the U.S. definition, as of June 20, 2011, 529 people qualify as having reached space, above altitude. Of eight X-15 pilots who exceeded in altitude, only one exceeded 100 kilometers (about 62 miles).  Space travelers have spent over 30,400 Man hour|man-days (83 man-years) in space, including over 100 astronaut-days of     As of 2008, the man with the longest cumulative time in space is Sergei  K. Krikalev, who has spent 803 days, 9 hours and 39 minutes, or 2.2 years, in space.   Peggy Whitson|Peggy A. Whitson holds the record for the most time in space by a woman, 377 days.   ===English=== In the United States, Canada, Ireland, the United Kingdom, and many other  nations, a professional space traveler is called an "astronaut".   – Glossary of Space Exploration Terminology <!-- Bot generated title  ] The term derives from the Greek words "ástron"  meaning "star", and "nautes"  meaning "sailor". The first known use of the term "astronaut" in the modern sense was by Neil R. Jones in his short story "The Death's Head Meteor" in 1930. The word itself had been known earlier. For example, in Percy Greg's 1880 book "Across the Zodiac", "astronaut" referred to a spacecraft. In "Les Navigateurs de l'Infini" (1925) of J.-H. Rosny aîné, the word  (astronautic) was used. The word may have been inspired by "aeronaut", an older term for an air traveler first applied (in 1784) to balloon  An early use in a non-fiction publication is Eric Frank Russell's poem "The Astronaut" in the November 1934 "Bulletin of the British Interplanetary Society". Ingham, John L.: "Into Your Tent", Plantech (2010): page 82. The first known formal use of the term astronautics in the scientific community was the establishment of the annual International Astronautical Congress in 1950 and the subsequent founding of the International Astronautical Federation the following year.  NASA applies the term astronaut to any crew member aboard NASA spacecraft bound for Earth orbit or beyond. NASA also uses the term as a title for those selected to join its NASA Astronaut  Corps.  The European Space Agency similarly uses the term astronaut for members of its European Astronaut  Corps.  ===Russian=== By convention, an astronaut employed by the Russian Federal Space Agency (or its Soviet space program|Soviet predecessor) is called a "cosmonaut" in English texts.  The word is an anglicisation of the Russian word "kosmonavt" ( ), one who works in space outside the Earth's atmosphere, a space traveler, name="space   Elsevier's dictionary of geography: in English, Russian, French, ... – Page 49] which derives from the Greek words "kosmos"  meaning "universe", and "nautes"  meaning "sailor". The Soviet Air Force pilot Yuri Gagarin was the first  the first person—in space. Valentina Tereshkova, a Russian factory worker, was the first female in space, as well as arguably the first civilian to make it there (see #Civilian and non-government  for a further discussion of civilians in space). On March 14, 1995, Norman Thagard became the first American to ride to space on board a Russian launch vehicle, and became the first "American cosmonaut". ===Chinese=== Official  texts issued by the government of the People's Republic of China use "astronaut" while texts in Russian use  ("kosmonavt").   In official  texts, the terms  (, "sailing personnel in universe") for cosmonaut and  (, "sailing personnel in sky") for astronaut have long been used. The phrase "tàikōng rén" (, "spaceman") is often used in Taiwan and Hong Kong. The term "taikonaut" is used by some  news media organizations for professional Chinese space program|space travelers from China. The word has featured in the Longman and Oxford English  English dictionaries, the latter of which describes it as "a hybrid of the Chinese term "taikong" (space) and the Greek "naut" (sailor)"; the term became more common in 2003 when China sent its first astronaut Yang Liwei into space aboard the "Shenzhou 5" spacecraft. This is the term used by Xinhua in the English version of the Chinese People's Daily since the advent of the Chinese space program. The origin of the term is unclear; as early as May 1998, Chiew Lee Yih () from Malaysia, used it in newsgroups.   ===Other terms=== With the rise of space tourism, NASA and the Russian Federal Space Agency agreed to use the term "spaceflight participant" to distinguish those space travelers from professional astronauts on missions coordinated by those two agencies. While no nation other than the Russian Federation (and previously the former Soviet Union), the United States, and China have launched a manned spacecraft, several other nations have sent people into space in cooperation with one of these countries. Inspired partly by these missions, other synonyms for astronaut have entered occasional English usage. For example, the term "spationaut" (French spelling: "spationaute") is sometimes used to describe French space travelers, from the Latin word "spatium" or "space", and the Malay language|Malay term "angkasawan" was used to describe participants in the Angkasawan program. In Hungary the word describing astronauts is "űrhajós" (from "űr" meaning "space" and "hajós" meaning "sailor".) ==Space travel milestones== <!--First Man, First Woman, First on the Moon, in chronological  File:Gagarin in  Gagarin, first human in space (1961) File:RIAN archive 612748 Valentina  Tereshkova, 1963 first woman in space. File:Neil Armstrong  Armstrong, first person to walk on the moon (1969). The first human in space was Soviet Yuri Gagarin, who was launched on April 12, 1961 aboard Vostok 1 and orbited around the Earth for 108 minutes. The first woman in space was Soviet Valentina Tereshkova, who launched on June 16, 1963 aboard Vostok 6 and orbited Earth for almost three days. Alan Shepard became the first American and second person in space on May 5, 1961 on a 15-minute sub-orbital flight. The first American woman in space was Sally Ride, during Space Shuttle Challenger's mission STS-7, on June 18, 1983.  In 1992 Mae Jemison became the first African American woman to travel in space aboard STS-47. The first manned mission to orbit the moon, "Apollo 8", included American William Anders who was born in Hong Kong, making him the first Asian-born astronaut in 1968. In April 1985, Taylor Wang became the first ethnic Chinese person in space.   On 15 October 2003, Yang Liwei became China's first astronaut on the Shenzhou 5 spacecraft. The Soviet Union, through its Intercosmos program, allowed people from other  (i.e. Warsaw Pact and other Soviet-allied) countries to fly on its missions. An example is Czechoslovak Vladimír Remek, the first cosmonaut from a country other than the Soviet space program|Soviet Union or the NASA|United States, who flew to space in 1978 on a Soyuz-U rocket.  On July 23, 1980, Pham Tuan of Vietnam became the first Asian people|Asian in space when he flew aboard Soyuz 37.  Also in 1980, Cubans|Cuban Arnaldo Tamayo Méndez became the first person of Hispanic and black African descent to fly in space, and Guion Bluford became the first African American to fly into space. The first person born in Africa to fly in space was Patrick Baudry, in 1985.   In 1985, Saudi arabia|Saudi Arabian Sultan Salman al-Saud|Prince Sultan Bin Salman Bin AbdulAziz Al-Saud became the first Arab Muslim astronaut in space.  In 1988, Abdul Ahad Mohmand became the first  to reach space, spending nine days aboard the Mir space station. With the larger number of seats available on the Space Shuttle, the U.S. began taking international astronauts. In 1983, Ulf Merbold of West Germany became the first non-US citizen to fly in a US spacecraft. In 1984, Marc Garneau became the first of 8 Canadian astronauts to fly in space (through 2010).  Canadian Space Agency, retrieved October 9, 2010.] In 1985, Rodolfo Neri Vela became the first Mexican-born person in space.  In 1991, Helen Sharman became the first Briton to fly in space.  In 2002, Mark Shuttleworth became the first citizen of an African country to fly in space, as a paying spaceflight participant.  In 2003, Ilan Ramon became the first Israeli to fly in space, although he died during a Space Shuttle Columbia  accident. ===Age milestones=== The youngest person to fly in space is Gherman Titov, who was 25 years old when he flew Vostok 2. (Titov was also the first person to suffer space sickness).   The oldest person who has flown in space is John Glenn, who was 77 when he flew on STS-95.  ===Duration and distance milestones=== The longest stay in space thus far has been 438 days, by Russian Valeri Polyakov.  As of 2006, the most spaceflights by an individual astronaut is seven, a record held by both Jerry L. Ross and Franklin Chang-Diaz. The farthest distance from Earth an astronaut has traveled was , when Jim Lovell, Jack Swigert, and Fred Haise went around the Moon during the Apollo 13 emergency.  ===Civilian and non-government milestones=== Depending on the exact definition of 'civilian', the first civilian in space was either Valentina Tereshkova  Vladimirovna  aboard Vostok 6 (she also became the first woman in space on that mission) or Joseph Albert Walker  in   Joseph A  on X-15 Flight 90 a month later. Tereshkova was only honorarily inducted into the USSR's Air Force, which had no female pilots whatsoever at that time. Joe Walker had joined the US Army Air Force but was not a member during his flight. The first people in space who had never been a member of any country's armed forces were both Konstantin Feoktistov and Boris Yegorov aboard Voskhod 1. The first  space traveler was Byron K. Lichtenberg, a researcher from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who flew on STS-9 in 1983.  In December 1990, Toyohiro Akiyama became the first paying space traveler as a reporter for Tokyo Broadcasting System, a visit to Mir as part of an estimated $12 million (USD) deal with a Japanese TV station, although at the time, the term used to refer to Akiyama was "Research Cosmonaut".    Akiyama suffered 
Atlantic Ocean	{"City":["Cape","North American"],"Organization":["National Geographic Society","Princeton University"],"Country":["Angola","Argentina","Australia","Brazil","Canada","Cape Verde","Cuba","Dominican Republic","Ethiopia","Gibraltar","Greenland","Iceland","Japan","Sierra Leone","United States","Virgin Islands"],"Company":["BBC","Princeton University Press"],"Person":["Kenneth Hsu"],"State":["Alaska","Newfoundland"]}	File:Atlantic Ocean -  Atlantic Ocean, not including Arctic and Antarctic regions File:Atlantic Ocean to  This video was taken by the crew of Expedition 29 on board the International Space Station|ISS. The pass starts from just north-east of the Island of Newfoundland and  over the North Atlantic Ocean to central Africa, over South Sudan. The Atlantic Ocean is the second-largest of the world's oceanic divisions. With a total area of about ,  "The New Encyclopaedia Britannica", Volume 2, Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1974. p.294 it covers approximately 20% of the Earth's surface and about 26% of its water surface area. The first part of its name refers to Atlas  of Greek mythology, making the Atlantic the "Sea of Atlas". The oldest known mention of "Atlantic" is in "Histories  Histories" of Herodotus around 450 BC (Hdt. 1.202.4): "Atlantis thalassa" (Greek:   English: Sea of Atlas); see also: "Atlas Mountains". The term Ethiopic Ocean, derived from Ethiopia, was applied to the southern Atlantic ocean as late as the mid-19th century. Before Europeans discovered other oceans, the term "ocean" itself was synonymous with the waters beyond the Strait of Gibraltar that we now know as the Atlantic. The early Greeks believed this ocean to be a  river encircling the world. The Atlantic Ocean occupies an elongated, S-shaped basin extending longitudinally between Eurasia and Africa to the east, and the Americas to the west. As one component of the interconnected World Ocean|global ocean, it is connected in the north to the Arctic Ocean (which is sometimes considered a sea of the Atlantic), to the Pacific Ocean in the southwest, the Indian Ocean in the southeast, and the Southern Ocean in the south. (Other definitions describe the Atlantic as extending southward to Antarctica.) The equator subdivides it into the North Atlantic Ocean and South Atlantic Ocean . ==Geography== File:Porto Covo pano April  Atlantic Ocean as seen from the western coast of  of surf breaking on rocky shore The Atlantic Ocean is bounded on the west by North and South America. It connects to the Arctic Ocean through the Denmark Strait, Greenland Sea, Norwegian Sea and Barents Sea. To the east, the boundaries of the ocean proper are Europe; the Strait of Gibraltar (where it connects with the Mediterranean Sea–one of its marginal seas–and, in turn, the Black Sea, both of which also touch upon Asia) and Africa. In the southeast, the Atlantic merges into the Indian Ocean. The 20th meridian east|20° East meridian, running south from Cape Agulhas to Antarctica defines its border. Some authorities show it extending south to Antarctica, while others show it bounded at the 60th parallel south|60° parallel by the Southern Ocean.  "Limits of Oceans and Seas"]. International Hydrographic Organization Special Publication No. 23, 1953. In the southwest, the Drake Passage connects it to the Pacific Ocean. The  Panama Canal links the Atlantic and Pacific. Besides those mentioned, other large bodies of water adjacent to the Atlantic are the Caribbean Sea; the Gulf of Mexico; Hudson Bay; the Arctic Ocean; the Mediterranean Sea; the North Sea; the Baltic Sea and the Celtic Sea. Covering approximately 22% of Earth's surface, the Atlantic is second in size to the Pacific. With its adjacent seas, it occupies an area of about ; name="brit"  without them, it has an area of . The land that drains into the Atlantic covers four times that of either the Pacific or Indian oceans. The volume of the Atlantic with its adjacent seas is 354,700,000 cubic kilometers (85,100,000 cubic mile|cu mi) and without them 323,600,000 cubic kilometres (77,640,000 cu mi). The average depth of the Atlantic, with its adjacent seas, is ; without them it is . The greatest depth, Milwaukee Deep with , is in the Puerto Rico Trench. The Atlantic's width varies from between Brazil and Sierra Leone to over in the south. ==Cultural significance== Transatlantic  travel played a major role in the expansion of Western civilization into the Americas. It is the Atlantic that separates the "Old World" from the "New World". In modern history|modern times, some idioms refer to the ocean in a humorously diminutive way as the Pond , describing both the geographical and cultural divide between North America and Europe, in particular between the  nations of both continents. Many British people refer to the United States and Canada as "across the pond", and vice versa. Example: BBC Click – Episode 04 April 2009 ==Ocean bottom== File:Atlantic  bathymetry|Map that uses color to show ocean depth The principal feature of the bathymetry (bottom topography) is a Mid-ocean  mountain range called the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. Kenneth Hsu (1992) Challenger at Sea, Princeton, Princeton University Press, ISBN 0-691-08735-0 p. 57 It extends from Iceland in the north to approximately 58° South latitude, reaching a maximum width of about . A great rift valley also extends along the ridge over most of its length. The depth of water at the apex of the ridge is less than in most places, while the bottom of the ridge is three times as deep. Several peaks rise above the water and form islands. Kenneth Hsu The Mediterranean Was a Desert, ISBN 0-691-02406-5 illustration 13. The South Atlantic Ocean has an additional submarine ridge, the Walvis Ridge. National Geographic Atlas of the World: Revised Sixth Edition, National Geographic Society, 1992 The Mid-Atlantic Ridge separates the Atlantic Ocean into two large trough  with depths from . Transverse ridges running between the continents and the Mid-Atlantic Ridge divide the ocean floor into numerous basins. Some of the larger basins are the Blake Basin|Blake, Guiana, North American, Cape Verde, and Canaries basins in the North Atlantic. The largest South Atlantic basins are the Angola, Cape, Argentina, and Brazil basins. The deep ocean floor is thought to be fairly flat with occasional deeps, abyssal plains, oceanic  seamounts, Oceanic basin|basins, Oceanic  Submarine  and some guyots. Various shelves along the margins of the continents constitute about 11% of the bottom topography with few deep channels cut across the continental rise. Ocean floor trenches and seamounts: *Puerto Rico Trench, in the North Atlantic, is the deepest trench at  Milwaukee Deep]. sea-seek.com *Laurentian Abyss is found off the eastern coast of Canada *South Sandwich Trench reaches a depth of *Romanche Trench is located near the equator and reaches a depth of about . Ocean sediments are composed of: *Terrigenous deposits with land origins, consisting of sand, mud, and rock particles formed by erosion, weathering, and volcanic activity on land washed to sea. These materials are found mostly on the continental  shelves and are thickest near large river mouths or off desert coasts. *Pelagic deposits, which contain the remains of organisms that sink to the ocean floor, include red clays and  pteropod, and siliceous oozes. Covering most of the ocean floor and ranging in thickness from they are thickest in the convergence belts, notably at the Hamilton Ridge and in upwelling zones. *Authigenic deposits consist of such materials as manganese nodules. They occur where sedimentation proceeds slowly or where currents sort the deposits, such as in the Hewett Curve. ==Water    of the thermohaline circulation. Purple paths represent deep-water currents, while blue paths represent surface  displaying a looping line with arrows indicating that water flows eastward in the far Southern ocean, angling north east of Australia, turning sough after passing Alaska, then crossing the mid-Pacific to flow north of Australia, continuing west below Africa, then turning northwest until reaching eastern Canada, then angling east to southern Europe, then finally turning south just below Greenland and flowing down the Americas' eastern coast, and resuming its flow eastward to complete the circle File:Oceanic  of the five major ocean gyres|alt=Map showing 5 circles. The first is between western Australia and eastern Africa. The second is between eastern Australia and western South America. The third is between Japan and western North America. Of the two in the Atlantic, one is in hemisphere. On average, the Atlantic is the saltiest major ocean; surface water salinity in the open ocean ranges from 33 to 37 parts per thousand (3.3 – 3.7%) by mass and varies with latitude and season. Evaporation, precipitation, river inflow and sea ice melting influence surface salinity values. Although the lowest salinity values are just north of the equator (because of heavy tropical rainfall), in general the lowest values are in the high latitudes and along coasts where large rivers enter. Maximum salinity values occur at about 25° north and south, in subtropical regions with low rainfall and high evaporation. Surface water temperatures, which vary with latitude, current systems, and season and reflect the latitudinal distribution of solar energy, range from below . Maximum temperatures occur north of the equator, and minimum values are found in the polar regions. In the middle latitudes, the area of maximum temperature variations, values may vary by 7–8 °C (12–15 °F). The Atlantic Ocean consists of four major water masses. The North and South Atlantic central waters make up the surface. The sub-Antarctic intermediate water extends to depths of . The North Atlantic Deep Water reaches depths of as much as . The Antarctic Bottom Water occupies ocean basins at depths greater than 4,000 metres. Within the North Atlantic, ocean currents isolate the Sargasso Sea, a large elongated body of water, with above average salinity. The Sargasso Sea contains large amounts of seaweed and is also the spawning ground for both the European eel and the American eel. The Coriolis effect circulates North Atlantic water in a clockwise direction, whereas South Atlantic water circulates  The south tides in the Atlantic Ocean are semi-diurnal; that is, two high tides occur during each 24 lunar hours. In latitudes above 40° North some east-west oscillation occurs. ==Climate== File:Atlantic hurricane  in the trade winds in the Atlantic Ocean—areas of converging winds that move along the same track as the prevailing wind—create instabilities in the atmosphere that may lead to the formation of  of Caribbean showing seven approximately parallel  arrows that extend from east of the Virgin Islands to Cuba. The southern arrows bend northward just east of the Dominican Republic before straightening out again. Climate is influenced by the temperatures of the surface waters and water currents as well as winds. Because of the ocean's great capacity to store and release heat, maritime climates are more moderate and have less extreme seasonal variations than inland climates. Precipitation  can be approximated from coastal weather data and air temperature from water temperatures. The oceans are the major source of the atmospheric moisture that is obtained through evaporation. Climatic zones vary with latitude; the warmest zones stretch across the Atlantic north of the equator. The coldest zones are in high latitudes, with the coldest regions corresponding to the areas covered by sea ice. Ocean currents influence climate by transporting warm and cold waters to other regions. The winds that are cooled or warmed when blowing over these currents influence adjacent land areas. The Gulf Stream and its northern extension towards Europe, the North Atlantic Current|North Atlantic Drift, for example, warms the atmosphere of the British Isles and north-western Europe and influences weather and climate as far south as the northern Mediterranean. The cold water currents contribute to heavy fog off the coast of eastern Canada (the Grand Banks of Newfoundland area) and Africa's north-western coast. In general, winds transport moisture and air over land areas. Tropical  develop in the southern part of the North Atlantic Ocean. More local particular weather examples 
